Cheikh Anta Diop 
I’RECOLONIAL 
BLACK AFRICA 
A 
Comparative Study of the Political 
and Social Systems of Europe and 
Black Africa, from Antiquity to the 
Formation of Modern States 
TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH BY HAROLD ). SALF.MSON 
LAWRENCE HILL Sc COMPANY 
Westport, Connecticut 


OTHER BOOKS BY CHEIKH ANTA DIOR 
The African Origins of Civilization: Myth or Reality 
Black Africa: The Economic and Cultural Basis 
for a Eederated State 
Civilization or Barbarism 
(In Vreperation) 


Copyright ©1987 by Lawrence Hill Sc Company 
Published by Lawrence Hill Sc Company 
First published in France by Presence Africaitie 
Translated from the French by Harold Salemson 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Diop, Chdkh Anta. 
Precolonial Black Africa. 
Translation of: L'Afrique noire pre-coloniale, 
I. Africa, Sub-Saharan—Politics and government, 
2. Social structure—Africa, Sub Saharan—History, 
y Africa—History—To i t98. 4, Europe—Politics and 
government. 5. Social structure—Europe—History. 
6. Europe—History—To 1492, 1. Title. 
JQ187 2.1 >5613 1986 967 86-22804 
ISBN 0-88208 -187-X 
ISBN 0-88208-188-X (pbk.) 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 l 
Manufactured in the United States of America 


To my professor Hasten Bachelard, 
whose rationalistic teaching 
nurtured my mind 
To my professors Af. Andre Lerot-Gourhan and Dean 
Andre Aymard, who oversaw my work 
All my gratitude 


Contents 
PREFACE xi 
I ANALYSIS OF THE CONCEPT OF CASTE i 
Major Divisions Within the Caste System 1 
Conditions of the Slaves 3 
The Ba-dolo 5 
Genesis of the Caste System 6 
Caste in Egypt 9 
Genesis of the Caste System in India 11 
II SOCIO-POLITICAL EVOLUTION OF THE 
ANCIENT CITY 18 
Social Classes 18 
Eupatridac 18 
The Plebs 20 
Priest-Kings 20 
The City-State 21 
Individualism 23 
Aristocratic Revolution 24 
Social Revolution 26 
Movements of Ideas 30 
7 he Influence of Egypt 31 
The Roman Empire 33 
III FORMATION OF THE MODERN 
EUROPEAN STATES 35 
The Political and Social Middle Ages 36 
The Intellectual Middle Ages 40 
IV POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IN BLACK 
AFRICA 43 
The Mossi Constitution 43 
I he Constitution of Cayor 46 


V 
Matrilinear Succession: Ghana, Mali 
Songhai, the Oriental Influence 
Precedence in Songhai 
The Case of Cayor 
Significance of Royalty The Vita list Concept 
Obligations of the Ting Separation of 
Secular and Religions The Lebou 
“Republic” 
Monarchic and Tribal Africa 
Origin of the Constitutional Regime 
Crowning of the King and Court Life 
Songhai Cayor Ghana Mali 
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION 
Power of the African Empires 
Strength and Extent of the Empires 
Ghana Mali Songhai 
Administrative Organization 
Resources of the Royalty and Nobility 
taxes Customs Gold Mines 
Royal Treasury Rooty Fees Connected 
with Assuming Administrative Functions 
Government and Administration 
Hostages Songhai Various Ministries 
A dm ini stra five 11 n ity 
Military Organization 
Structure Knights Cavalry Foot Soldiers 
Flotilla Royal Guard Strategy 
and Tactics 
Judicial Organization 
VI ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION 
Barter 
Modern-type Commerce 
Currency 
Import-Export 


Means of Transportation, Roads 137 
Economic Wealth 141 
Comparison of Socio-economic Structures in 
Africa and Europe 142 
Navetanism 150 
The Taalibe 151 
Slave Manpower: Concentration 152 
Retribalization 157 
Primitive Accumulation 158 
VII IDEOLOGICAL SUPERSTRUCTURE: ISLAM 
IN BLACK AFRICA ,62 
Peaceful Penetration 163 
The Role of Autochthonous Chiefs 163 
Metaphysical Reasons 165 
Power of Religious Beliefs 1 67 
Mystical Underpinning of Nationalism 169 
Renunciation of the Pre-Islamic Past r7i 
“Shcrifism” 172 
VIII INTELLECTUAL LEVEL: TEACHING AND 
EDUCATION , 76 
The University 176 
Teaching Method 177 
The Program 178 
Awarding of Diplomas 179 
Intellectual Development 179 
Importance of the Sherif 186 
Survival of the Black Tradition in Education 190 
Historical Reminder: The Moroccan Invasion 192 
•X TECHNICAL LEVEL iy6 
Architecture in Nilotic Sudan 196 
Architecture in Zinibab we 19 7 
Architecture in Ghana and the Niger Bend i 99 
Metallurgy ZOA 


Glassmaking 205 
Medicine and Hygiene 205 
Weaving 2.0 6 
Agriculture 207 
Crafts 207 
Hunting 207 
Nautical Experience 208 
MIGRATIONS AND FORMATION OF 
PRESENT-DAY AFRICAN PEOPLES 212 
Origin of the Yoruba 216 
Origin of the Laobe zi 7 
Origin of the Peul 220 
Origin of the Tuculor 223 
Origin of the Screr 224 
Origin of the Agni (Ani) 228 
Origin of the Fang and Bamum 228 
Formation of the Wolof People 229 
Post face 2 35 


Preface 
Until now fry6o, date of the first edition], the history of Black 
Africa has always been written with dates as dry as laundry 
lists, and no one has almost ever tried to find the key that 
unlocks the door to the intelligence, the understanding of 
African society. 
railing which, no researcher has ever succeeded in re¬ 
vivifying the African past, in bringing it back to life in our 
minds, before our very eyes, so to speak, while remaining 
strictly within the realm of science. 
Yet the documents at our disposal allow us to do that 
practically without any break in continuity for a period of two 
thousand years, at least insofar as West Africa is concerned. 
therefore, it had become indispensable to unfreeze, in a 
manner of speaking to defossilize that African history which 
was there at hand, lifeless, imprisoned in the documents. 
However, this work is not properly speaking a book of 
history; but it is an auxiliary tool indispensable to the histo¬ 
rian. It indeed affords him a scientific understanding of all the 
historical facts hitherto unexplained. In that sense, it is a 
stud) in African historical sociology. It permits us no longer 
to >e surprised at the stagnation or rather the relatively stable 
equi ibrium of precolonial African societies: the analysis of 
f teir socio-political structures presented in it allowing ns to 
gauge the stabilizing factors in African society. 
One thereby understands the technical and other lags to 
xi 


I 
XII PREFACE 
he the result of a different kind of development based upon 
absolutely objective fundamental causes. 
Thus, there is no longer any reason for embarrassment. 
Once this awareness achieved, vve can immediately and 
fully in almost every slightest detail relive all the aspects of 
African national life: the administrative, judicial, economic, 
and military organizations, that of labor, the technical level, 
the migrations and formations of peoples and nationalities, 
thus their ethnic genesis, and consequently almost linguistic 
genesis, etc. 
Upon absorbing any such human experience, we sense 
deep within ourselves a true reinforcement of our feeling ot 
cultural oneness. 


PRECOLON IAL BLACK AFRICA 


Chapter One 
ANALYSIS OF THE 
CONCEPT OF CASTE 
It seems necessary at the outset to point out the specific 
features of the caste system, in order more clearly to bring out 
the difference in social structure which has always existed 
between Europe and Africa. The originality of the system 
resides in the fact that the dynamic elements of society, whose 
discontent might have engendered revolution, are really satis¬ 
fied with their social condition and do not seek to change it: a 
man of so-called “inferior caste” would categorically refuse to 
enter a so-called “superior" onc.! In Africa, it is not rare for 
members of the lower caste to refuse to enter into conjugal 
relations with those of the higher caste, even though the 
reverse would seem more normal. 
MAJOR DIVISIONS WITHIN THE CASTE SYSTEM 
Let us proceed to a description of the internal structure of 
the caste system, before attempting an explanation of its 
origin. The present territory of Senegal will be used here as a 
model for study: nevertheless, the conclusions which are 
drawn from it hold true for the whole of detribalized 
Sudanese Africa. In Senegal, society is divided into slaves and 
freemen, the latter being gor, including both ger and neno. 
The ger comprise the nobles and all freemen with no 
manual profession other than agriculture, considered a sacred 
activity. 


2 
PRECOLONIAL BLACK AIKICA 
I he neno comprise all artisans: shoemakers, black¬ 
smiths, goldsmiths, etc. These arc hereditary professions. 
The djam, or slaves, include the djam-bur, who are slaves 
of the king; the djam negnday, slaves of one’s mother; and the 
djam neg bay, slaves of one’s father. The ger formed the 
superior caste. But—and herein lay the real originality of the 
system—unlike the attitude of the nobles toward the bour¬ 
geoisie, the lords toward the serfs, or the Brahmans toward 
the other Indian castes, the ger could not materially exploit 
the lower castes without losing face in the eyes of others, as 
well as their own. On the contrary, they were obliged to assist 
lower caste members in every way possible: even if less wealthy, 
they had to “give” to a man of lower caste if so requested. In 
exchange, the latter had to allow them social precedence. 
The specific feature of this system therefore consisted in 
the fact that the manual laborer, instead of being deprived of 
the fruits of his labor, as was the artisan or the serf of the 
Middle Ages, could, on the contrary, add to it wealth given 
him by the “lord.” 
Consequently, if a revolution were to occur, it would be 
initiated from above and not from below. But that is not all, as 
we shall see: members of all castes including slaves were 
closely associated to power, as de facto ministers; which re¬ 
sulted in constitutional monarchies governed by councils of 
ministers, made up of authentic representatives of all the peo¬ 
ple. We can understand from this why there were no revolu¬ 
tions in Africa against the regime, hut only against those who 
administered it poorly, i.e., unworthy princes. In addition, 
there were, of course, also palace revolutions. 
For every caste, advantages and disadvantages, depriva¬ 
tions of rights and compensations balanced out. So it is 
outside of consciences, in material progress and external influ¬ 
ences, that the historical motives must be sought. Taking into 
account their isolation, which however must not be exagger¬ 
ated, it can be understood why Africa’s societies remained 
relatively stable. 


ANALYSIS OF THE CONCEPT OF CASTE 
3 
CONDITIONS OF THE SLAVES 
The only group that would have an interest in overthrow¬ 
ing the social order were the slaves of the father’s household, 
in alliance with the ba-dolo (“those without power,” socially 
speaking, the poor peasants).-’ indeed, it is clear from what 
preceded that the status of the artisans was an enviable one. 
Their consciences could in no way be bearers of the seeds of 
revolution; being the principal beneficiaries of the monar¬ 
chical regime, they defend it up to this day, or regret its 
passing. 
By definition, all slaves should make up the revolutionary 
class. One can easily imagine the state of mind of a warrior or 
any freeman whose condition through defeat in war radically 
changes from one day to the next, as he becomes a slave: as in 
classical antiquity, prisoners of war were automatically subject 
to being sold. Persons of rank might be ransomed by their 
families, who would give in exchange a certain number of 
slaves. In principle, one could have a nephew serve as a sub¬ 
stitute: a man’s sister’s son, in this matriarchal regime, would 
he given by his uncle in ransom; whence the two Wolof 
expressions, na djay (“may he sell," i.e., the uncle), and djar 
bat (“he who can buy back,’’ i.e., the nephew). But this is 
where the slaves come in. 
In this aristocratic regime, the nobles formed the cavalry 
of the army (the chivalry). The infantry was composed of 
slaves, former prisoners of war taken from outside the na¬ 
tional territory'. The slaves of the king formed the greater part 
of his forces and in consequence their condition was greatly 
improved. They were now slaves in name only. The rancor in 
their hearts had been lightened by the favors they received: 
they shared in the booty after an expedition; under protection 
of the king, during periods of social unrest, they could even 
indulge in discreet pillage within the national territory', against 
the poor peasants, the ba-dolo—but never against the artisans 
who were always able to gain restitution of their confiscated 


4 
PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
goods. The regime, the social mores obtaining, allowed the 
artisans to go directly to the prince, without fear, and com¬ 
plain to him. J he slaves were commanded by one of their 
own, the infantry general, who was a pseudo-prince in that he 
might rule over a fief inhabited by freemen. Such was the case, 
m the monarchy of Cayor (Senegal), of the dfaraf Bunt Kern] 
the representative of the slaves within the government and 
commander-in-chiet of the army. His power and authority 
vvete so great that the day of his betrayal brought an end to the 
kingdom of Cayor. We will return to this matter, under the 
heading of political constitutions. 
However, the ennobling of a slave, even by the king, was 
impossible in Africa, in contrast to the customs of European 
courts. Birth appeared to be something intrinsic in the eyes of 
this society and even the king would have been ill-advised to 
ennoble anyone at all, even a freeman. 
I he slaves of the king, by force of circumstance, thus 
became an element favorable to the preservation of the regime; 
they were a conservative element. 
I he slave of the mother’s household was the captive of 
our mother, as opposed to the slave of our father. He might 
have been bought on the open market, come from an inheri¬ 
tance, or be a gift. Once established in the family he became 
almost an integral part of it; he was the loyal domestic, 
uspcctcd, feared, and consulted by the children. Due to the 
matt ini dial and polygamous regime, we feel him closer to us, 
because he belongs to our mother, than the slave of the father, 
who is at an equal distance, socially speaking, from all the 
children of the same father and different mothers. As can 
easily he seen, the slave of the father would become the 
scapegoat for the society. ] herefore, the slave of the mother 
could not be a revolutionary. 
I he slave of the father’s household, by contrast, consider¬ 
ing his anonymous position (our father is everyone’s, so to 
speak, while our mother is truly our own), will he of no 
interest to anyone and have no special protection in society. He 


ANALYSIS OF THE CONCEPT OF CASTE, 
5 
may be disposed of without compensation, However, his con¬ 
dition is not comparable to that of the plebeian of ancient 
Rome, the thete of Athens, or the sudra of India. The con¬ 
dition of the sudra was based on a religious significance. 
Contact with them was considered impure; society had been 
structured without taking their existence into account; they 
could not even live in the cities nor participate in religious 
ceremonies, nor at the onset have a religion of their own. We 
will return to this matter later. However, the alienation of the 
slaves of the father’s household in Africa was great enough, on 
the moral and material plane, that their minds could he truly 
revolutionary. But for reasons connected to the preindustrial 
nature of Africa, such as the dispersion of the population into 
villages, for example, they could not effect a revolution. Wc 
must also add that they were really intruders in a hostile 
society which watched them day and night, and would never 
have allowed them time to plot a rebellion with their peers. It 
made it even less possible for them to acquire economic posi¬ 
tion and moral and intellectual education, in short, any social 
strength comparable to that of the bourgeoisie of the West 
when it overthrew the aristocracy. Slaves of this category might 
apparently at best have joined forces with the poor peasants, 
those ba-dolo (“without power”) whose labor actually sus¬ 
tained the nation more than that ot the artisans. 
THE BA-DOLO 
1 he ba-dolo by definition, were not rieftos, but gers of 
modest means, doomed to the cultivation of the earth. As 
gers, belonging to die same level as the prince, the latter found 
nothing dishonorable or debasing in pillaging their goods, 
however small they might be. Since a well-to-do ger, finding 
himself in privileged circumstances, might marry a princess, 
although of secondary rank to be sure, the ba-dolo being a ger 
without means would have to carry the fiscal burdens of 


6 
I* RECOLON t A L It 1. AC K AFRICA 
society. Indeed, according to the African concept of honor, it 
was not those ot interior rank who were to lie exploited, 
should occasion arise, but rather social equals, particularly 
where the latter did not have the material power to defend 
themselves, which was the case ot the hd-dolo. lor reasons of 
this kind, the possessions of the artisan were spared. In such 
pteindustrial, agricultural regimes, it is true, everyone was 
involved in the cultivation of the soil, including the king (who, 
according to Cailliaud, was the foremost farmer of Secnitaar).4 
But on closer examination, it was tin* ba-dolo, more than the 
artisans, who ted the population and constituted the majority 
ot the laboring class. 
Out of caste prejudice, however, as can easily he deduced 
liom the preceding, they could not lower themselves so far as 
to form an alliance with the malcontent slaves, especially 
since the latter were disorganized and had no chance of suc¬ 
cess. It such an alliance had come to he in the course ol 
African history, it would have led to a peasants’ and slaves' 
revolt, a jacquerie, ot the kind Kgypt experienced toward the 
close of the Middle Kingdom, or the sort common to Western 
history ever since the Middle Ages—none of which was ever 
successful. It would have been a revolt and not a revolution 
such as the French (bourgeois) Revolution. But we shall see 
that, in precolonial Africa, the length of the periods of pros¬ 
perity had nothing in common with that of the periods of 
dearth, which were rather exceptional and ephemeral, and 
that the general abundance of economic resources and the 
extraordinary, legendary wealth of the continent in fact fore¬ 
closed the birth and growth ot any revolutionary spirit in 
African consciousness. 
GEN RSIS OF THE CASTE SYSTEM 
I he caste system arose from a division of labor, but under 
an advanced political regime, which was monarchic (for one 


ANALYSIS OF THE CONCEPT OF CASTE 
7 
never lin<Js castes where there are no nobles). However, it is 
very probable ihat the specialization of labor, which led to the 
hereditary transmission of trades in the caste system, on a 
family or individual scale, evolved om of the clanic organize 
riom it one looks at the totemic names, all those who practice 
die same trade, all those who belong to the same caste, are of 
die same totemic clan. For example, in spite of all the ex- 
ogamic marriages that may have taken place after detnhaliza- 
tion, all Mtfrs an? shoemakers, belong to the same clan, and 
have the same totem, no matter how territorially separated 
they may have become. Thus, two Mars who meet for the first 
time understand that they have a common clan origin. 
Be that as it may, at the time of the empires of Ghana and 
Mali, as evidenced by the testimony of Ibn Khaldun, Ibn 
Battuta, and the Tarikh es Sudan, detribali/ation had already 
taken place throughout these great empires. 
At the time of the conquest of Northern Africa 1 by the Mus¬ 
lims |, some merchants penetrated into the western part of the 
land of the Blacks and found among them no king more power¬ 
ful than the king of Ghana. 11 is states extended westward to the 
shores of the Atlantic Ocean. Ghana, the capital of this strong, 
populous nation, was made up of two towns separated by the 
Niger River, and formed one of the greatest and best populated 
cities of the world- The author of the Book of Roger |A1 Bakrij 
makes special mention of it. as does the author of Roads and 
Kingdoms.4 
One may suppose that in a city such as Ghana, which in 
the tenth century was already one of the largest in the world, 
tribal organization had completely given way to the demands 
of urban life. At any rate, transmission of the individual name 
and inheritance, as it was practiced in the empire of Mali, 
according to Ibn Battuta, leaves us in no doubt about the 
disappearance of the tribal system in this region in 13s-- 
They (the Blacks( arc named after their maternal uncles, and not 
after their fathers; it is not the sons who inherit from their 
fathers, but the nephews, the sons of the father s sister. I have 


8 
PKECOl. ONIA1. BLACK AFRICA 
never met with this List custom anywhere else, except among 
the infidels of Malabar in India.5 
One fact that has not been sufficiently stressed is that the 
individual had a first, or given, name but not a family name 
before the dislocation of the dan. I heretofore, a person bore 
the name of the dan, but only collectively, so that when asked 
his name, he would always reply that he was of the clan of the 
Ba-I'ende, Ba-Oule, Ba-Kongo, etc. He was a member of the 
community; and only the dispersal of it could afford him 
individual existence as well as a family name, which remained 
then, as a sort of recall, the name of the dan. This is therefore 
one of the reasons we always speak of totemic names. And 
according to the passage cited from Ihn Battuta, we see that 
the individual already bore a personal family name, the name 
of his mother, due to the matriarchal system. This is con¬ 
firmed by all the family names of important personages trans¬ 
mitted to us by the iarikh es Sudan. This work was written by 
a learned Black of the sixteenth century, a.d., but relates 
events the most ancient of which date back to the first cen¬ 
turies after the birth of Christ. The same could be said of the 
Tarikh el fettach, written in the same period, by another 
Black from Timbuktu (Katij. 
The stability of the caste system was assured by the hered¬ 
itary transmission of social occupations, which corresponded, 
in a certain measure, to a monopoly disguised by a religious 
prohibition in order to eliminate professional competition. 
Indeed, religious significance was attached to the inheritance 
of the trade. According to the current beliefs, a subject from 
outside a trade, even if he acquired all the skill and science of a 
calling which was not that of his family, would not he able to 
practice it efficiently, in the mystical sense, because it was not 
his ancestors who concluded the initial contract with the 
spirit who had originally taught it to humanity. Due to an 
understandable tendency toward generalization, even scien¬ 
tific specializations to which no notions of caste are at- 


ANALYSIS OF THE CONCEPT OF CASTE 
9 
taehed_e.g., eye or ear medicine, etc.—are dominated by this 
idea. Up to tins point in Africa, in the villages, a given family 
was specialized in the treatment of one particular part of the 
body only; it is interesting to note that this was also the case in 
ancient Egypt where, in all probability, there was originally a 
caste system. 
CASTE IN EGYPT 
There are seven classes of Egyptians, and of these some are 
called priests, others warriors, others herdsmen, others 
swineherds, others trademen, others interpreters, and, lastly, 
pilots; such are the classes of Egyptians; they take their names 
from the employments they exercise. Their warriors are called 
Ca Iasi lies or Hermotybies, and they are of the following dis¬ 
tricts, for all Egypt is divided into districts* The following are 
the districts of the Hermotybies: Busiris, Sais, Chemmis, Pa- 
p re mis, the island called Ptosopitis, and the half of Natho. From 
these districts are the Hermotybies, being in number, when they 
are most numerous, a hundred and sixty thousand. None of 
these learn any mechanical art, hut apply themselves wholly to 
military' affairs. These next are the districts of the Calasiries: 
Thebes, Bubastis, Aphthis, I an is, Mcndes, Sebennys, Athribis, 
Pharbaethis, Thmius, Onuphis, Anysis, Mycephoris; this dis¬ 
trict is situated in an island opposite the city Bubastis. These are 
the districts of the Calasiries, being in number, when they are 
most numerous, two hundred and fifty thousand men; neither 
arc these allowed to practise any art, but they devote themselves 
to military pursuits alone, the son succeeding to his father.6 
The swineherd caste alone was considered impure in 
Egypt, because of the prevailing religious notion concerning 
pork. 
The Egyptians consider the pig to he an impure beast, and, 
therefore, if a man in passing by a pig should touch him only 
with his garments, he forthwith goes to the river and plunges 
in: and in the next place, swineherds, although native Egyptians 
are the only men who are not allowed to enter any of their 


1 o 
PRECOLON1A I. li LACK AFRICA 
temples; neither will any man give his daughter in marriage to 
one of them, nor take a wife from among them; but tlie 
swineherds intermarry among themselves. The Egyptians, 
therefore, do not think it right to sacrifice swine to any other 
deities; but to the moon and Bacchus they do sacrifice them 
* t i 
The art of medicine is thus divided among them: each 
physician applies himself to one disease only, and not more. All 
places abound in physicians; some physicians a re for the eyes, 
others for the head, others for the teeth, others for the parts 
about the belly, and others for internal disorders.8 
One might believe that in Egypt as well clanic division 
corresponded, at least to some extent, with the division oi 
labor, on the word of Herodotus. It is difficult to deny the 
totemic significance of the nonies (districts); with their local 
flags, they were the first geographical districts occupied by the 
totetnic clans that progressively fused to give birth to the 
Egyptian nation. But even in the low period, when those 
territorial divisions no longer had any more than an admin¬ 
istrative significance, there remained enough of the effects of 
the totem ic past so that one cannot doubt its existence. 
Be that as it may, as evidenced by the preceding, there was 
a dual bond, religious and economic, which confined each 
individual within his caste, except in the case of the slave who, 
not being a native, in reality belonged to a traditional lay- 
category. Society had been conceived without taking his exis¬ 
tence into account; he had been forcibly introduced into it, an 
intruder; a place was made for him somehow or other, with¬ 
out its assuming any religious significance; he was forcibly 
subjugated, for nothing more nor less than economic and 
material reasons. No metaphysical concept later arose to jus¬ 
tify his condition, as if to ease the consciences of the citizens 
We shall see thiit it was otherwise in India for the pariahs and 
for the plebeians of antiquity, where the religious systems 
stipulated the impurity of these inferior classes. 
In Africa, slaves belonged to a hierarchy: the social con¬ 
dition of the masters carried over to the slaves. Slaves of a 


analysis of the concept of caste 
1 T 
nobleman were superior to those of a simple freeman and 
"gave” to the latter; and the latter in turn, if the slave of a ger, 
would “give” to the slave of an artisan; an artisan might own 
slaves, since he was a gor. 
Nobles and clergy, traditional or Islamic (following the 
Almoravide movement of the tenth century), belong to the 
same caste and marry among themselves. But these nobles 
have the peculiarity of not being landowners, in the sense we 
give to this term as applied to the Middle Ages in the Western 
world. The land in Africa does not belong to the conquerors; 
the mind of the nobles is not concerned with the possession of 
great landed estates to he cultivated by serfs bound to the soil; 
in this sense there was no feudal system in Africa. I bis ques¬ 
tion will be treated later. In Africa, the nobility never acquired 
this keen sense of ownership of land. Alongside, the “con¬ 
queror,” the king, there is in each village a poor old man in 
tatters, but respected and spared, whom the spirit of the earth 
is considered to have entrusted with the land. Earth is a 
divinity: it would be sacrilege actually to appropriate any part 
of it. It only lends itself to our agricultural activity, in order to 
make human life possible. Even during the Islamic period, 
i.c., up to the present day, this religious concept obscurely 
influences the consciousness of all Africans and it has contrib¬ 
uted historically toward stopping or restraining tendencies to 
form a feudal system. 
I he concept of privately owned land developed only 
among the Lcbou of the Cape Verde peninsula, as a result of 
the development of the great port of Dakar, after European 
penetration. Plots of land there were until very recently more 
valuable than anywhere else in what was French West Africa. 
GHNESIS of THE CASTE SYSTEM IN INDIA 
One cannot ignore the case of India, when considering 
the general question of caste. 1 he notion of caste is so special 


1 
[ 2 
PRECOLONIAL B LACK AFRICA 
in that part of the world that a study which did not take it into 
account would be lacking in consistency and demonstrate 
vigor, as well as generality. 
According to I enormant, this type of social organization 
was totally alien to the Aryans and Semites. Wherever we find 
it, in Egypt, Babylon, Africa, or the kingdom of Malabar in 
India, we can be sure it is due to a southern Cushite influence. 
I bis system is essentially Cushite, and wherever ins found 
it is not difficult to establish that it stems originally from this 
race of people. We have seen it flourish in Babylon. 1 he Ary as tit 
India, who adopted it, had borrowed it from the peoples of 
Cush who preceded them in the Indus and Ganges basins * . 
While this appears to have been the origin of the caste 
system in India, one can see the transformations that the 
Aryan invasions occasioned in it* 
It h .is often been maintained, without production of am 
conclusive historical documents, that it was the Aryans them 
selves who created the caste system after having subjugated the 
Black aboriginal Dravidian populace. I lad this been the case, 
the criterion of color should have been at iis foundation: there 
should have been at most three castes. Whites, Blacks, and the 
gamut of crossbreeds. However, this is not the ease, and in 
India also the castes effectively correspond to a division of 
labor, without any ethnic connotations* Strabo, in his Geog¬ 
raphy, citing a more ancient author (Megasthcnes), reports 
that there existed in India seven castes corresponding to cer¬ 
tain well-defined social functions: Brahmans (philosophers), 
Kshatriyas (warriors), Farmers, Agents of the King or Hphori 
(who crisscrossed the country to inform the king of what was 
going on), Workers and Artisans, Counselors and Courtiers, 
and Shepherds and I Uniters.111 
Originally the number of castes was smaller: only four, 
according to the Laws of Matin, also corresponding to a 
division of labor, excluding any idea of ethnic differentiation, 
since a Dravidian can nisi as well be a Brahman. 


ANALYSIS oi the concept of caste 
1} 
S-7. But in order to protect litis universe He, the most 
resplendent one, assigned separate (duties and) occupations to 
those who sprang from his mouth, arms, thighs, and feet. 
K8. To Brihinanas he assigned teaching and studying (the 
Veda), sacrificing for tltcir own benefit and for others, giving 
and accepting U>f alms). 
H9, The Kshatriya lie commanded to protect the people, to 
bestow gifts, to offer sacrifices, to study (the Veda), and to 
abstain from attaching himself to sensual pleasures; 
yo. The Vaisya to tend cattle, to bestow gifts, to offer 
sacrifices, to study (the Veda), to trade, to lend money, and to 
cultivate land. 
91. One occupation only the lord prescribed to the .Siklra, 
to serve meekly even these (other) three castes.11 
Giving a divine character to property is an Aryan custom: 
in Rome, Greece, and India it led to the isolation from society 
of an entire category of individuals who had no family, had 
neither hearth nor home, and no right of ownership. They 
would everywhere constitute the class of the wretched, able to 
acquire wealth only after the advent of money: profane wealth, 
which had not been foreseen by the traditional and sacred 
laws regulating ownership that were made up by the ancestors 
of the Aryans. It was through its concern with the ownership 
of material goods that the Aryan spirit or genius impressed its 
mold upon the caste system. 
In the l.iiws of Ah mu one can follow a meticulous de¬ 
scription of the objects that might be possessed by such and 
such a class and, above all, those objects the possession of 
which was forbidden to the lowest class and its crossbreeds. 
I his consciousness of material interest, this cxclusivism in the 
domain of possession were the ideas added by the Aryans to 
the caste system, which at first should not have contained 
them in India; it would never contain them in Africa. 1 lere it is 
necessary to recall all the differences between the African slave 
on the one hand and the plebeian or sudra on the other. T be 
Aryans meant to effect an economic classification of society, in 


1 
14 PRBCOIONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
India as well as in Rome and Greece, and not an ethnic 
separation. 
5 i. Kut the dwellings of Kaudalas mid Svapafeas sh.il! !u 
outside the village, they must be made Apapatras, and their 
wealth (shall he) dogs and donkeys. 
Si. I hen dress (shall he) the garments of the dead, (they 
shall cat) their food from broken dishes, black iron (shall he 
their ornaments, and they must always wander from place to 
place. 
S c A man who fulfills a religious duty, shall not seek 
intercourse with them; their transactions (shall he) among 
themselves, and their marriages with their equals, 
S^, I heir food shall be given to them by others (than an 
Aryan giver) in a broken dish; at night they shall not walk about 
in villages and in towns. 
55. By day they may go about for the purpose of their 
work, distinguished by marks at the king's command, and the) 
shall carry out the corpses (of persons) who have no relatives; 
that is a settled rule, 
56. By the kings order they shall always execute the crimi 
mils, in accordance with the law, and they shall take for them 
selves the clothes, the beds, and the ornaments of (such) 
criminals, 
57. A man of impure origin, who belongs not to any castes 
(van/a, bm whose character is: not known, who, (though) not 
an Aryan, has the appearance of an Aryan, one may discover by 
his acts.11 
This last paragraph reveals that the “untouchables" of 
India no mure than the plebeians of Rome in principle be¬ 
longed to a race different from that of the lords. Indeed, the 
criteria that allowed one to distinguish them were of a moral 
or material nature, not an ethnic one. The text further elabo¬ 
rates that it is in the behavior of an individual that one can 
discern the tendencies “unworthy of an Aryan" he inherits 
from parents of a base class. In the next chapter, we will study 
the conditions which led to the formation of this class, all of 
them social. We must stress that this class was totally absent 


analysis of the concept of caste 
I 5 
from the unaltered southern systems in which religious pro¬ 
hibition* might isolate a social category (e.g., the swineherds 
of Egypt)- ye* not affect it in its material interest to the point 
expressed in the preceding text. That is one of the fimdamcn- 
I differences between the African and Aryan conceptions. 
I he swineherds of Egypt could absolutely acquire wealth in 
the same manner as others. They were not forbidden the 
possession of any goods; but since they raised an animal to 
which religious prejudices were attached, these prejudices re¬ 
dounded onto their own condition, and isolated them on a 
cultural plane, while leaving intact all their material interests. 
All the traditional prohibitions of the rest of Black Africa were 
of the same nature and never affected material goods. On the 
contrary, we can unquestionably affirm that in every such 
instance the possibilities of material gain on the part of sub¬ 
jects of the category concerned were increased by a kind of 
sentiment of immanent justice, a kind oi compensatory spirit 
inherent in the society, for not only can they retain all their 
belongings, but they can increase their possessions by “ask¬ 
ing” for some of others. 
Eor these material considerations, the l.itti’s <>( Mann 
tolerated a certain permeability of the caste system. I hey 
indeed provided for the case in which members ot a superior 
class could no longer assure their existence solely by the 
means that religion recognized as legitimately theirs. In such a 
ease, they provided a whole series of adaptations and accom¬ 
modations. 
8y, But a Brahmana, or a Kshatriya, living by a Vaisyas 
mode of subsistence, shall carefully avoid the pursuit of) agri¬ 
culture, (which causes) injury to many beings ami depends on 
Others. 
84. (Some) declare that agriculture is something excellent, 
(but) that means of subsistence is blamed by the virtuous; (for) 
the wooden (implement) with iron point injures the earth and 
ulie beings) living in the earth.1' 


precglon r a l b lack afk jca 
t6 
In the domain of marriage, the permeability of the caste 
system existed, but it was unilateral. 
12, For the first marriage of twice-born men (wives) of 
equal caste are recommended, but for those who through desire 
proceed (to marry again) the following females, (chosen) ac¬ 
cording to the (direct) order (of the castes), are most approved, 
J 3■ h is declared that a Sfidra woman alone (can be) the 
wife of a Sudra, she and one erf Ins own caste (the wives) of a 
Vaisya, those two and one of his own caste (the wives) of a 
Kshatriya, those three and one of his own caste (the wives) of a 
Brahmawa.1 1 
The study of the caste system in India holds a wealth of 
lessons: it allows one to judge the relative importance of 
racial, economic, and ideological factors. One can see that the 
Aryan race created Western materialistic and industrial tech¬ 
nological civilization wherever the historical and economic 
circumstances were ripe. It is these factors which must he 
considered determinant, and not a peculiar set of mind in 
which the Aryans alone were privileged participants, confer¬ 
ring on them intellectual superiority over all others. Indeed, 
since it was a branch of this race that actually settled in Iran 
and India, adopting the social superstructure of the southern 
peoples—while adapting it—if the racial set of mind were all 
that counted, one might ask: Why, then, did it not create a 
civilization of the Western type in there countries? Economic 
conditions aside, the caste system of social organization as¬ 
sures greater permanemce and stability in society than does 
the system of classes created by the Aryans in Rome and in 
Greece—the study of which we will now begin. 
N O T E S 
]. Were it a matter of material interest alone. 
z. Ha-dole, in Fuculor, means “without power." Dole in Wolof refers to 
physical or moral strength. 


analysis of the concept of caste 
T7 
V 
4* 
c 
6, 
7- 
9- 
C lilliaud, Frederic, of Nantes, Voyages a Meroe, an Heave blanc„ #«- 
fifcog/, Aim* /r Midi du Royaume de Scnnar, Pointed by 
authorization of the King, at the Royal Printing Office, 1826, 
l(in Khaldun, Histoire des Berberes et des dynasties mustdmanes de 
VAfrique Septentrionale (trans, Baron de Slane). Algiers: Government 
Printshop, 1954* H, 109, 
ibn Battuta. Voyage au Soudan (trans, Baron de Slane), p, 12, See also 
his Travels in Asm and Africa, 1325-1314, H./YR, Gibb, trans. 
The Histories of Herodotus (trans, Henry Cary). New York: Appleton, 
1899, Book II, Pars. 164-166, 
Idem, Par. 47* 8, Idem, Par. 84. 
Lenormant. Histoire ancienne des Vheniciens. Paris: Ed. Levy, 1890, p. 
384, 
r Qt The Geography of Strabo (trans. Horace Leonard Jones). Cambridge: 
Harvard UniV. Press, Vol. VIL Book XV, L 67ft., Pars, y^ff. 
ji. The L atvs of Mann (trans. from the Sanskrit by Georg Bolder), Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1866; reprinted, New York: Dover Publications, 
1969, Book I: “The Creation,” 24-2.5, Secs, 87-91, 
11. Idem, Book X: “Mixed Castes,” 4 r 4-4 1 5, Secs. 51-57. 
13, Idem, Book X: “Occupations of the Castes,11 420-421, Secs, 83—84, 
14, Idem, Book III: “Marriage,” 14, Secs. \ z-i 3- 


Chapter Two 
SOCIO-POLITICAL EVOLUTION 
OF THE ANCIENT CITY 
SOCIAL CLASSES 
I lie facts hereafter related are essentially taken from The 
Ancient City by bustel dc Coulanges. As Grenier remarks in 
his Les religions etrusque et romaine (The Etruscan and 
Roman Religions), Hustel de Coulanges's work remains the 
authority. At most, perhaps might one reverse the order of the 
factors and, contrarily to what he said, explain the religious 
ideological superstructure by the economic living conditions. 
Bur even on this point, it must be recognized that his thought 
is extremely subtle; tor some developments he clearly seems to 
give precedence to the living conditions. 
Originally there were two classes in Greco-Roman so¬ 
ciety": 
Athens: Eupatridae and Thetes; 
Sparta: Equals and Inferiors; 
Rome: Patricians and Plebeians. 
EUPATRIDAE 
Ibis first class is that of the “haves." From the very 
beginning, property had had a divine character and only 
members of this class could possess the land in the sacred 
sense of the term. They alone, having ancestors, could have a 
domestic cult and a god, without which one had no political, 
icial, or religious personality and was thus “impure,” a 
i 8 
J 


EVOI UTION OF THE ANCIENT CITY 
i 9 
plebeian. They alone knew the sacred rites, the prayers which 
|or a long time had remained unwritten and were transmitted 
orally from father to son. Superstition and conservatism were 
inherent in them: they alone had an interest in maintaining 
the order established by their ancestors. If a priest introduced 
into the cult the slightest innovation, he was punished with 
death. 
Thus it is not this class that was responsible for the 
progressive profanation of religion and the body of traditional 
beliefs, a profanation inseparable from what we have come to 
call Greek secular and rational thought. This was the work of 
the plebs. The owning class alone was patriotic since only it 
had a “patria,” i.e., freedom of the city, while the plebs, 
without hearth or home, were restricted to the outside or the 
low parts of the cities, like the untouchables of India, Pa¬ 
triotism, so characteristic of Greco-Roman antiquity, is ex¬ 
plained by the fact that society had not allowed for the 
foreigner, who thereby became enemy number one, without 
rights, who might be killed with impunity and whose very 
eyes made the holy objects impure. He was punished with 
death if he touched a tomb or entered a sacred place. I le could 
protect bis life only by voluntarily becoming the slave of a 
citizen of the city: hence, the class of clients. One can under¬ 
stand why men would defend to the last drop of their blood 
their city, outside of which they were vile, impure beings, 
untouchables, worthy at best of slavery. I bus patriotism 
sprang from the very structure of society. At the start, it did 
not reflect a sentiment of purely national pride, as was the case 
in Egypt, 
Religious egotism—the gods were first and foremost do¬ 
mestic property—was an obstacle to the existence of a na¬ 
tional territory more extensive than the city: houses might not 
even touch one another, the connecting wall being a sacrilege 
jn "OUtqiiity. Even in death, families were not commingled, The 
oundaries of fields were sacred: the Terminus gods. 
Primogeniture, which prevailed, produced among the eu- 


zo 
lJ RECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
patridae the unprivileged and discontented class of cadets (or 
younger sons): they would in the end revolt in various cities in 
order to abolish primogeniture and paternal authority. 
nn: flubs 
The lowest class, the plcbs, was made up of all those 
whose hearths had gone out, fatherless children or bastards, 
onetime clients who now felt freer among the plcbs. These 
could possess no land, married without sacred rites, in other 
words, profanely, had no sacred prayers, no religion: this is 
why they were the ones to trample upon tradition and liberate 
society from its ultra-conservative clvangelessncss, which 
might otherwise have survived up to our time. In their aliena¬ 
tion without any compensation whatsoever, as against the 
golden rule of African societies, is where we may look for the 
deeper causes of the transformations and revolutions of the 
society of antiquity, when they had become the numerically 
predominant element of the people. The different phases of 
these revolutions will now be described. 
FRIEST-KTNGS 
At first there existed contusion between priesthood and 
civil power. The king of the city was at the same time priest, 
magistrate, and military chief. But kingship was never heredi¬ 
tary in Rome. Kings did not need military force to command 
obedience: they had neither armies, nor finances, nor police. 
The confusion of religious and political authority did not end 
with royalty; the magistrate of the Republic was also a priest: 
he was designated by rite, that is, by the drawing of lots in 
Athens, I litis the people had the impression of receiving their 
magistrates from the gods who had caused them to be set 


EVOLUTION OF THE ANCIENT CITY 
2,1 
designated. They did not seek the most courageous one, nor 
the one with the greatest military aptitude or best suited to lie 
chief of state, to invest with power: rather, the man best loved 
of the gods. All of domestic and political life was dominated 
by almost unimaginable superstition: a sneeze could cause an 
undertaking to be stopped; the Senate might meet to make the 
gravest decisions concerning the security of the city, yet dis¬ 
perse at once when a sign of evil omen appeared. Acts per¬ 
formed with imperfect rites were worthless. As Fustcl de 
Coulanges points out, only at the time of Cicero did people 
begin not to live their religion, but use it as a political expedi¬ 
ent. It was useful to the government, hut by then religion was 
already dead in the people’s souls.1 
I HE CITY-STATE 
The Aryans, as long as they were relatively isolated in 
their northern cradle, never had the ability to conceive of a 
political, judicial, and social state organization extending be¬ 
yond the limits of the city. The notion of state as a “territory” 
comprising several cities or that of empire without question 
came to them from the southern world, and in particular from 
the example of Egypt. 
Iwo facts we can easily understand: first, that this religion, 
peculiar to each city, must have established the city in a very 
strong and almost unchangeable manner; it is, indeed, mar¬ 
velous how long this social organization lasted, in spite of all its 
faults and all its chances of ruin; second, that the effect of this 
religion, during long ages, must have been to render it impossi¬ 
ble to establish any other social form than the city. 
Every city, even by the requirements of its religion, was 
independent. It was necessary that each should have its par¬ 
ticular code, since each had its own religion, and the law flowed 
bom the religion. Each was required to have its sovereign tri- 
tmat, and there could be no judicial tribunal superior to that 


Z 2 
PRFCOLON1AL BLACK AFRICA 
of the city. Each had its religious festivals and its calendar; ilu 
months and the year could not be the same in two cities, .is tin; 
series of religious acts was different. Each had its own money, 
which at lirst was marked with its religious emblem. Each had 
its weights and measures. It was not admitted that there could 
be anything common between two cities. The line of demarca¬ 
tion was so profound that one hardly imagined marriage possi¬ 
ble between the inhabitants of two different cities. Such a union 
always appeared strange, and was long considered illegal. The 
legislation of Rome and that of Athens were visibly averse to 
admitting it. Nearly everywhere children horn of such a mar¬ 
riage were confounded with bastards, and deprived of the rights 
of citizens . , . 
hi ancient times there was something more impassable 
than mountains between two neighboring cities* there were the 
series of sacred bounds, the difference of worship, and the 
hatred of the gods towards the foreigner 
For this reason the ancients were never able to establish, or 
even to conceive of, any other social organization than the city; 
Neither the Greeks, nor the Latins, nor even the Romans, for a 
very long time, ever had a thought that several cities might be 
united, and live on an equal footing under the same govern¬ 
ment. 1 here might, indeed, be an alliance, or a temporary 
association, in view of some advantage to be gained, or some 
danger to be repelled; but there was never a complete union; for 
religion made of every city a body which could never be joined 
to another. Isolation was the law of the aiv.z 
Under these conditions the annexation of a city or a 
neighboring territory was unthinkable: one could not govern a 
conquered city because one was a foreigner in the eyes of its 
gods. One might massacre the population or deport it in us 
entirety to be sold. One pillaged towns but always returned 
home, I here could be no question of settling conquered pop¬ 
ulations on one’s own territory and giving them residency, as 
Merneptah, a Pharaoh of the Nineteenth Dynasty and other 
Pharaohs of Egypt had done with Aryan peoples each time 
they conquered them. 
Colonization rather had a religious character. The 
J 


EVOLUTION OF THE ANCIENT CITY 
•M 
younger branches without inheritance lighted a torch in the 
city hearth so as to found another on virgin soil. I hus were 
founded by Athenian families the dozen towns of Ionia in 
which for a long time they preserved the priesthood and 
political power from father to son. Athens was the mother city 
to these twelve towns which were its “colonies," As can be 
seen, the bond was purely religious and Athens did not claim 
in any way to exercise the least political control over the life of 
these cities. Nevertheless, because of economic necessities, 
confederations \scrc finally formed to group cities together in 
a very loose bond. Such were, in particular, the commercial 
federations of Delos, Thermopylae, Calauria, and Delphi. 
However, according to I-’ustel dc Con hinges, these associations 
were for a long time of purely religious significance and it was 
only under Philip of Macedon that the Amphictvons, as they 
were called, began to be concerned with political affairs. 
INDIVIDUALISM 
The individual was totally subordinate to the city. The 
dictatorship of the city was absolute on people’s consciences. 
Once its power became established, the city-state became 
responsible for the rearing of the children in the place of the 
father of the family. It even regulated clothing, the wearing of 
beards by men, the adornment of women, and went so far as 
to dictate the sentiments that one should show. 
Sparta had just suffered a defeat at l.euctra, and many of 
its citizens had perished. On the receipt of this news, the 
relatives of the dead had to show themselves in public with gay 
countenances. I he mother who learned that her son had es¬ 
caped, and that she should see him again, appeared afflicted 
and wept. Another, who knew that she should never again see 
her son, appeared joyous, and went around to the temple to 
thank the gods. What, then, was the power of the state that 
could thus order the reversal of the natural sentiments, and he 
obeyed?5 


M 
i' RECOLONIAL BI.ACK AFRICA 
We perceive here one of rhe causes of Western individu¬ 
alism as opposed to African collectivism. It has often been 
spoken about without minutely examining how it originated. 
So, let us inspect the facts available to our analysis. The 
families of different citizens constituting the city were separate 
cells, so independent that it was sacrilege for the houses to 
touch one another, these feelings of independence going hack 
to life on the steppes. But each individual, each family head, 
each citizen was directly riveted to the dictatorial state by a 
bond of bronze. The day when this gave way, we would 
progressively see individuals attempting once again to become 
absolutely separate, for they had not learned to develop a 
communal civil life. In contrast, in Africa, the power of the 
state, although centralized from Egypt to the rest of Black 
Africa, never subjugated the consciences of citizens in so 
strong a way. The Pharaoh, considered by Moret to he the 
most powerful moral figure that ever existed, never dreamed of 
controlling the sentiments or the dress of his people; the 
individual always felt dependent upon the state and socially 
speaking upon his peers within community life. In Africa, 
there always existed a reciprocal invasion of consciences and 
individual liberties. In other words, each one felt that he had 
material and moral rights upon the personalities of others and 
that they reciprocally had rights on him. This held throughout 
all political regimes. Even today, on a superficial level the 
African may display a spirit of independence toward the com¬ 
munity'; but he is hardly likely to grasp the gap which sepa¬ 
rates the Western individual from the group. 
ARISTOCRATI C REVO LUTJ ON 
burning hack to the political regimes of the city-states and 
following their development, one finds that their legitimacy 
was questioned as early as the seventh century b.c. The coinci- 


EVO LU T 1 O N OF THE A N C I E NT CITY 
Z$ 
jcnce of the priesthood with political power created a grave 
problem- The aristocracy formed by the Eupatridae found it 
to its advantage to disassociate the two factors, leaving in the 
hanrls of the king the symbolic ritual and the priesthood, 
while retaining for itself the political power. A revolution 
therefore had to break out, a first revolution of only a political 
but no social character. 
The kings wished to he powerful, and the patres preferred 
that they should not he- A struggle then commenced in all the 
cities, between the aristocracy and the kings. 
Everywhere the issue of the struggle was the same, Royalty 
was vanquished. But we must not forget that this primitive 
royalty was sacred. The king was the man who pronounced the 
prayers, who offered the sacrifice, who had, in fine, by heredi¬ 
tary right, the power to call down upon the city the protection 
of the gods- Men could not think, therefore, of doing away with 
the king; one was necessary to their religion; one was necessary 
to the safety of the city. . . . 
Plutarch [writes]: “As the kings displayed pride and rigor 
in their commands, the greater part of the Greeks took away 
their power, and left them only the care of religion/’4 
What was then seen was a curious phenomenon: the 
kings, kept in place by religion, trampled it as much as they 
could, for it was the very thing that gave strength to the 
Eupatridae, the aristocracy. The latter derived all their power 
from the ancestral religious tradition. The kings then called 
upon the secular plebeian majority, who were not part of the 
population, which included only the citizens and the clients. 
This was what was done by the first seven kings of Rome. 
Scrvius, through a series of laws, improved the lot of the plebs, 
go ing them conquered lands which they might own in fact, if 
not by ritual. 
The victory of the Eupatridae was consecrated by the 
reform of Lycurgus: 
Lycurgus had for a moment the power to supress royalty: 
he took good care not to do this, judging that royalty was 


26 
I* RE C O LON1A L 1A LACK AFRICA 
necessary, and the royal family inviolable. Bur he arranged so 
that the kings were henceforth subordinate to the senate m 
whatever concerned the government, and that they were no 
longer anything more than presidents of this assembly, and the 
executors of its decrees. A century later, royalty was still farther 
weakened; the executive power was taken away and was en¬ 
trusted to annual magistrates, who were called efthors. 
For four centuries, from Codrus to Solon, the Eupatridae 
governed the city without there having been any striking 
political events: their authority appeared legitimate 
throughout this entire period when they were the only ones to 
know and to transmit the sacred unwritten formulas from 
father to son. The life of the city, properly speaking, declined 
because urban activity was incompatible with the patriarchal 
style of life of the Eupatridae who, after their victory over 
royalty, all went back to living on their country estates, sur¬ 
rounded by servants: this was a kind of feudal system, in view 
of the weakening of royal power. There were assemblies in the 
city only periodically for religious services. Society was 
steeped in the aristocratic spirit, as evidenced by the impor¬ 
tance attached to noble birth * The praise heaped upon mem¬ 
bers of a noble family within the framework of epic poetry was 
quite identical to that expressed by African griots. 
SOCIAL REVOLUTION 
I be aristocratic revolution modified the external form ot 
government but not the social structure: the political revolu¬ 
tion bad forestalled a social and domestic one. However, the 
latter was not slow in coming: the gens came apart as the right 
of primogeniture disappeared in the wake of the revolt of the 
younger branches in the cities, i he clients peaceably broke 
away in the course of a long domestic struggle. 
At Heraclea, Cnidus, 1st ms, and Marseilles the youngrr 
branches took up arms to destroy at the same time the right o\ 
primogeniture and the paternal authority/' 


EVOLUTION OF THl- ANCIENT CITY 
2-7 
Irue, we do not find in the history of ,111 y city mention 
made of a general insurrection among this class. If there were 
armed struggles, they were shut up and concealed within the 
circle of each family. For more than one generation there were 
on one side energetic efforts for independence, and implacable 
repression on the other. There took place in each house a long 
and dramatic series of events which it is impossible to-day to 
retrace. All that we can say is, that the efforts of the lower classes 
were not without results. An invincible necessity obliged the 
masters, little by little, to relinquish some of their omnipo¬ 
tence. 
1 lie client, who in some respects could be compared to 
the slave of the mother’s household in Africa, finally disap¬ 
peared in Athens. This was the result of the legislative work of 
Solon, who first took a trip to Kgypt to draw inspiration from 
the laws of that country. Before him a client might be sold to 
pay off a debt and could not own land because of the “sacred 
boundaries’ which institutionalized the ritual ownership by 
the patron of the soil he cultivated. Solon, according to the 
time-honored expression, “overturned the sacred boundaries,” 
thus allowing poor peasants to become landowners. He for¬ 
bade the bonding of oneself to pay off a debt. 
The creation of the tribunal, for the defense of the plebs, 
promoted its unity with the clientele, which then felt secure 
and freer to light for its rights. Clicntship became voluntary 
and contractual, as with the “class” of navetanes of Black 
Africa. 
Henceforth, there were only two classes: on the one 
Hand, the owners who formed the ruling aristocracy, on the 
other, the landless of all sorts, comprising both the plebs and 
tie former clientele. All the political and social contradictions 
1ung laid bare, a veritable class struggle, harsh and long, was 
to take place. 
Under the aristocracy, plebs and people had regretted the 
time of the kings, which they considered retrospectively as a 
'oden Age. At its outbreak, the struggle consisted in 
tengthening the royalty against the aristocracy, then, from 


28 
PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
the sixth century on, the people began to take leaders belong¬ 
ing to the master class (lords), but without the sacrosanct 
character of royalty, who were called tyrants. As Fused tie 
Coulanges noted, this was an event of supreme importance to 
the extent that it consecrated, for the first time in ancient 
history, the obedience of man to man and not that of man to a 
divinity through an individual. 
Wlren tiic kings had been everywhere overthrown, and the 
aristocracy had become supreme, the people did not content 
themselves with regretting the monarchy; they aspired to re¬ 
store it under a new form. In Greece, during the sixth century, 
they succeeded generally in procuring leaders; not wishing to 
call them kings, because this title implied the idea of religious 
functions, and could only he borne by the sacerdotal families, 
they called them tyrants.8 
The invention of money by the Lydians in the sixth 
century, the progress of commerce, and the new conditions of 
war allowed the plebs to grow rich and acquire importance. 
Money was not sacred, anyone might own it, including 
plebeians, religious tradition not yet having had time to put its 
stamp upon it. Commerce was no longer forbidden to anyone 
cither: it grew fantastically as Athens looked out toward the 
sea. Henceforth the plebs entered the army and contributed 
men to the infantry and the navy; naval operations became 
progressively more frequent, significant, and decisive than the 
former land battles which were marked by the chivalry of the 
patricians, whose members alone were rich enough to afford 
the necessary armor. The state did not furnish it as it does 
today. I lie aristocracy by definition was idle: the manual 
workers, the artisans were not as in Black Africa free men, 
belonging to castes, but slaves. As the plebs grew richer and 
entered into the towns—from which until then they had been 
excluded—they acquired a faith of their own by adopting 
foreign beliefs (Kgyptian and Asiatic divinities}, while gradu¬ 
ally the aristocracy became pauperized. I he plebs had its own 
J 


EVOLUTION OF THE ANCIENT CITY 
z9 
bourgeoisie, iis intellectuals, its politicians, its tyrants now 
emerged from its own ranks and no longer from that of the 
Eupatridae: they became real tyrants of the people. The real 
concern of the plebs, as we can see, was not so much to build a 
regime radically different from that of the aristocracy which 
had oppressed them, but to become as much as possible like 
this class by setting up all the institutions and customs they 
had lacked to be comparable to it. 
There then took place a new phenomenon which resem¬ 
bles modern times: a veritable money class having been cre¬ 
ated, the plebs turned into a financial bourgeoisie and the 
Eupatridae, like the nobles of the industrial age, married 
money in the person of a plebeian heiress. Hence a witticism 
of the times: “What is this man’s lineage?”—"He married 
money 
Whin once the lower classes bad gained these points; 
when they had among themselves rich men, soldiers, and 
priests; when they had gained all that gave man a sense of his 
own worth and strength; when, in fine, they had compelled the 
aristocracy to consider them of some account, it was impossible 
to keep them out of social and political life, and the city could 
be closed to them no longer. 
The entry of this inferior class into the city was a revolu¬ 
tion, which from the seventh to the fifth century filled the 
history of Greece and Italy. 
The efforts of the people were everywhere successful, but 
not everywhere in the same manner, or by the same means. In 
some cases the people, as soon as they felt themselves to be 
strong, rose, sword m hand, and forced the gates of the city 
where they had been forbidden to live. Once masters, they 
cither drove out the nobles and occupied their houses, or 
contented themselves with proclaiming an equality of rights. 
h*s is what happened at Syracuse, at Erythrae, and at 
Miletus.9 
Solon s reform coincided with the triumph of the people: 
was of a political and social nature. That of Cleisthenes was 


\Q PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
of a religious nature: its purpose was to give a faith to all rhosi 
who had none, merely by geographically splitting up tlu 
urban population. As against these two legislations, DracoV 
which preceded Solon s by thirty years, was drawn up at a time 
when the Eupatridae had not yet been conquered. It was thus 
only a more or less precise codification ot the interests of that 
class. 
But the poor class was not slow in reacting and naming 
Pisistratus as dictator. I lenceforth the public interest would 
replace the oldtime religion, universal suffrage would become 
the form of government, and Athenian democracy would un¬ 
dergo its effects: the unemployed sold their votes in broad 
daylight and a series of laws was established often confiscating 
the wealth of the rich. It was a kind of prefiguration of the time 
of the sharers. Democracy was to suffer from these political 
blunders to the benefit of the tyrants of the people. 
MOVEMENTS OF IDEAS 
At that same time, philosophical ideas began to have an 
effect in the political arena. 
Fhen philosophy appeared, and overthrew all the rules ui 
the ancient polity. It was mi possible to much the opinions of 
men without also touching the fundamental principles of their 
government. Pythagoras, having a vague conception of the Su¬ 
preme Being, disdained the local worships; and this was sutli 
cient to cause him to reject the old modes ot government, and m 
attempt to found a new order of society,ln 
The ideas of Anaxagoras, of the Sophists who followed* 
those of Socrates, Plato, and Zeno contributed powerfully 10 
broadening governmental conceptions, and to adapting them 
to current conditions, rather than allowing them to follow \ 
series of ossified ancestral formulas, no longer meeting an) 
need. Socrates contributed to freeing morals from religions, 
placing justice above law, and making conscience the guide of 


EVO t.UTION Ol THE ANCIENT CITY 
\ 1 
an |n this, without meaning to, he opposed the tradition of 
the city, resulting in the supreme penalty n> him. 
Anaxagoras had the idea of a God whose principle is 
pure intelligence; it is He who governs our consciences. I Ic 
therefore rejected the religious formalism of his time by avoid¬ 
ing assemblies as much as possible and refusing political 
duties. 
I he Sophists had great merit not in developing a precise 
and explicit political philosophy, but in disturbing tradition 
by questioning ii and discussing it publicly, lastc for the 
dialectic little by little came into existence and people ac¬ 
quired the habit of discussing everything instead of passively 
accepting ready-made formulas. But until Plato even the 
boldest of Greek thinkers were not able to go beyond the 
concept of the city-state; at most they tried to give this frame¬ 
work a new internal structure: Plato’s Re I tl 11C ^ ^ 
It seems that it was Zeno, with the Stoic school, who, 
having conceived the idea of a universal Clod, first spread the 
concept of a government which would bring at! men together. 
We see from this liovv tar ideas had ad valued since the age 
of Socrates, who thought himself hound to adore, as far as he 
was able, the gods of the state. Even Plato did not plan any other 
government than that of a city. Zeno passed beyond these 
narrow limits ot human associations. I le disdained the divi¬ 
sions which the religions of ancient ages had established. As he 
believed in a Cod of the universe, so he had also the idea of a 
State into which the whole human race should enter, . . . 
Higher ideas prompted men to form more extensive so¬ 
cieties. They wav attracted towards unity . . .M 
The INFLUENCE OF KtiYPT 
Without any doubt, these universalist ideas derived from 
die southern world and in particular from Egypt. A thousand 
vears before the tireek thinkers, Socrates, Plato, Zeno, etc,, 
the Egyptians, with the reform of Amenophis IV, had clearly 


PRECOLON IA1 BLACK AFRICA 
U 
conceived the idea of a universal God responsible for creation, 
whom all men, without distinction, could adore: He was not 
the God of any particular tribe, nor of any city, or even any 
nation, but indeed the God of all humankind. 
I liese conceptions which Christianity later adopted were 
not originally a part of it, it seems. It first appeared as a Jewish 
sect, dependent on Judaism. It was only after Saint Paul had 
been ill received by the “Jews” that he turned toward the 
pagans to convert them. Christianity then became the religion 
of everyone, instead of being that of a given tribe chosen by 
God. If it was able to triumph over the other Eastern faiths 
which coexisted with it in Rome, it was not by its moral 
superiority, but probably because its first adepts, having been 
distrusted and sometimes accused ot political dissideuce 
(Saint Paul overtly opposed the cult of the Emperor and pre¬ 
dicted the end of temporal rule), were treated as martyrs: they 
were thrown to the wild beasts or beheaded. It was the moral 
benefit of this repression which Christianity alone suffered 
that contributed to assuring its triumph over the other faiths 
which were Itrurgically better established and morally even 
more elevated. One cannot too strongly emphasize all that 
primitive Christianity borrowed from the cult of Isis in Rome, 
even in the structure of its processions. “Egypt is the country 
from which contemplative devotion penetrated into Eu¬ 
rope.”12 
Concerning the religion of Isis and Osiris the same au¬ 
thor wrote: “No religion had yet brought to men so formal a 
prom i se of immortal ity: this a hove a 11 gave to the Al ex and r i a a 
mysteries [of Isis] their power of attraction.” Li 
We know that Christianity shortly made these con¬ 
ceptions of resurrection and immortality its own. 
I hese foreign religions which made no distinctions 
among individuals often allowed the disinherited of the plebs 
to worship. Here again the broadening of religious con¬ 
sciousness manifestly came from the outside. I he love of one s 
neighbor was a moral commonplace in the southern world: 


EVOLUTION OF THE ANCIENT CITY 
33 
this notion could represent an advance in morals only in the 
individualistic northern Mediterranean. 
The Oriental worships, which began in the sixth century 
to overrun Greece and Italy, were eagerly received by the plebs; 
these were forms of worship which, like Buddhism,14 excluded 
no caste, or people.I S 
THF, roman empire 
Such then were the political and religious ideas which 
were to permit Rome, allowing for economic conditions, to 
destroy the municipal regime and establish the empire. 
At the time of the Peloponnesian War, it had been seen 
that in all the cities the poor were partisans of Athens and the 
rich of Sparta. Depending on which faction was victorious in 
a given city, it became a vassal of Sparta or Athens. Ancient 
society thus was already divided into two dearly distinct 
classes, the haves and the have-nots. Their struggle had 
pushed urban nationalism into the background. It was this 
situation which in large part allowed the Roman city, so well 
equipped and enriched by commerce, to conquer the Mediter¬ 
ranean basin. 
According to Fustel dc Coulanges, Rome was considered 
a city where a Senate composed of rich patricians governed to 
the exclusion of the wretched subjugated populace. This idea 
exerted a very' strong influence on the ruling aristocracies of 
other Mediterranean cities troubled hv the class struggle. 
Therefore at the time of the Roman conquest many of them 
offered only a semblance of resistance; many declared them- 
sdves open cities and their Senates purely and simply turned 
their cities over to Rome. Such was the course of events that 
led to the establishment of the Roman Empire. 
Municipal patriotism thus became weakened and died out 
m men’s minds. Every man’s opinion was more precious to him 


34 
PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
than his country, and the triumph of his faction became much 
dearer to him than the grandeur or glory of his city.1 ^ 
At Ardea, the aristocracy and the plebs being at enmity, the 
ptebs called the Volscians to their aid, and the aristocracy 
delivered the city to the Romans.17 
N O 7 E S 
J- Fused de CaulangC5,La Cite antique :Paris: Hacherte, 1930), p, ir, 
*•' 1dc Coulanges, Numa Denis, The Ancient City (trails. Willard 
Small, e R73'? (New York: Doubleday Anchor reprint ed., n.d,), pp 
201—203, ( J his and all succeeding quotations from this work are from 
this edition.) 
3* p. m. 4. Id., p« 235-236, 
2-53* 
7. Id., p. 255), 8. /<Y, pp. 270-271, 
355- 
r 1, M*t pp. 3 58-360. 
12. Grenier, Les Religions etrusque et romaine (Paris: Ed. RU.K, Coll. 
Maria, 1948), tome 3, p, 208, 
1 p, 209. 
14, Buddhism, by its ncm-exdusivist character, could not be an Indo- 
European religious creation, 
i F us re I de Coulanges, op. cit>, p. 275. 
j6, Id,, p. 368. 17, ld.t p. 370 (citing Livy, VIII, 11.). 
5. Id., p, 237. 6. hi, p, 
9. Id,, pp. 275-276. 10. 


Chapter Three 
FORMATION OF TI IE MODERN 
EUROPEAN STATES 
The end of antiquity coincided with the triumph of Chris¬ 
tianity. The latter in its hierarchical organization bore the 
imprint of the temporal organization of the Roman empire: 
bishoprics, dioceses, etc., which corresponded to the Roman 
administrative divisions. The bishop of the capital, Rome, was 
also to have special importance and become Pope. The mem¬ 
ory of the Roman empire, perpetuated by the church, is what 
constantly impelled the barbarian kings to try to rebuild a 
universal Christian empire. During the High Middle Ages 
there was true intellectual regression; the West was no longer 
able to carry forward the achievements of antiquity. This was 
especially striking in the domain of sculpture and architec¬ 
ture. The culture and knowledge achieved in antiquity vege¬ 
tated in the monasteries, to emerge from them beginning in 
the thirteenth century. During this period, the Church played 
a positive role in social and intellectual development and in 
the tempering of behavior. 
After the failure of the universal empire, national states 
grew up with the Great Discoveries, the diffusion of ideas, the 
existence of an insatiable international market for goods, as a 
consequence of the Portguese, Spanish, Dutch, and Norman 
geographicaI expeditions. 
I he West was technically less advanced than the East. It 
Was able to overcome its inferiority only with the help of the 
Atabs who, beginning in the seventh century, wherever they 
moved spread the achievements of antiquity which had vege- 


*6 1’RECOI.ON I A I. BLACK AFRICA 
tatcd in Byzantium. Through their philosophers Avicenna and 
Averroes, Aristotle became known and discussed in the West. 
They introduced advanced metallurgy (the steelworks of 
Toledo, Spain). They also introduced the navigator’s compass, 
gunpowder, the use of naval maps, and perhaps the axial helm 
which made possible the exact determination of a ship’s posi¬ 
tion. Coasting was no longer necessary and long-distance 
sailing with high-side ships came in. In chemistry and mathe¬ 
matics they also introduced much knowledge derived from the 
East. 
The fact that Spain was the first European country to 
acquire technical supremacy at the dawn of modern times and 
for a certain period dominate die world can be explained only 
by the Arab contribution during the time of its colonization. 
These two facts are not generally connected as close!)' as they 
should be. 
In brief, the Catholic Church on one hand, Islam on the 
other, were the great preservers of the knowledge of antiquity 
and contributed greatly, over different geographical routes, 
during the Middle Ages to the transmission of this knowledge 
to the new modern nations about to emerge. 
from the social point of view, the Middle Ages would see 
the rise of a bourgeois class alongside the wretched serfs. The 
situations of the serf, the plebeian, and the slave of the father’s 
household were to a certain extent comparable except as 
concerns their numbers and concentrations. Those of the 
bourgeois and the African man of caste were not in any way 
comparable: the former was a once-exploited freedman with a 
conscience full of revolutionary germs driving toward trans¬ 
formation, whereas the latter was in essence conservative. 
THE 1*0 UTICA I AND SOCIAL MIDDLE AGES 
I he Western Empire had been dismembered in the sixth 
century. There followed a period of chaos and barbarism; in 


FORMATION OF THF, EUROPEAN STATES 
*7 
51 i. Clovis created the Frankish kingdom with the support of 
the church. I lis descendants became the Do-Nothing Kings, 
the last of whom was eliminated by the Mayor of his Palace: 
l>£nin the Short was crowned and consecrated by the Pope. 
This was the origin oi the sacrosanct royalty of the West, 
which was to last until the Revolution. Charlemagne was 
crowned in the year 8oo. He created the I loly Roman Empire, 
provided it with a strong centralized administrative organiza¬ 
tion, and began a movement of rebirth in the arts, literature, 
and science. His tutor Alcuin played a key role in the un¬ 
earthing and diffusing of the knowledge of antiquity, es¬ 
pecially through his commentary on the works of Aristotle. 
The transmission to modern man of the Tfivtum (dialects, 
rhetoric, grammar) and the Quadrivium (arithmetic, geome¬ 
try, astronomy, music) was tints assured. 
I he three grandsons of Charlemagne divided the empire 
among themselves after his death, since succession to the 
throne was not yet regulated by any precise tradition. Each 
kingdom would then start to grow weaker and weaker and 
finally break apart. In the tenth century, invasions by new 
barbarians (Normans, I lungarians, etc.) threw Europe into a 
time of anarchy and political weakness. Most of the kings had 
only a title without power, and could no longer assure the 
security of their subjects. Ibis situation forced the subjects to 
mass around local chiefs strong enough to protect them. The 
feudal regime was to he horn: 1 he lord who would set himself 
up on a territory', having constructed on it a fortress of either 
wood or stone capable of protecting the neighboring peasants 
in case of invasion, would become their real chief, and rela¬ 
tionships of dependency would become established, the de¬ 
tails of which we will examine. 
Andre Ribard in his book, the only work of Marxist 
synthesis published in France in the domain of history [as of 
'96o], gives a rigorous analysis of the formation of this feudal 
system: 


PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
Authority in Europe had not ceased to crumble—knigs 
remained but no states. Too far removed from the imitiedinu 
peril to lie effective against invaders, monarchal power tin 
longer constituted a true central government. The notion of du 
state was eclipsed by that of security* Populations concentrated 
at spots favorable for resistance. Escaping from pillage alum 
was the castle where people and flocks could take refuge whik 
its armed men scoured the countryside in the name of the lord 
When the village could no longer be defended, it was aban 
doned. So this society had to be reorganized around the fur 
tified castle, I he effectiveness of the castle dictated a new 
hierarchy in which the king was merely the nominal suzerain, 
the essential part being the military caste of lords who de 
centralized power to their own advantage. 
Each man put his trust in one more powerful than he; these 
bonds of vassalage wove a system of protection and servitude in 
which the lord was quickly tempted to abuse his authority 
danger would often come from the protector himself A skm 
historic gestation thus led to a coherent system: feudalism. Its 
greatest flowering was m France, thick with wooden castle 
keeps, battle command posts for military units split up by 
regions, to fend off the Scandinavian pirates w hose penetration 
was so deep that they supplied the naval terminology of tlu- 
French language. This organization was just as good as the lord 
over it: it really assured some security only it lie was courageous 
and well equipped with men and horses. When during two or 
three generations the same family had devoted itself to this 
permanent guerrilla warfare, the feudal lord became the 
suzerain of a number of territories in which, bound together hv 
innumerable traditions of Christian, Germanic, ( cltic, or Ro¬ 
man origin, these vassals paid their tributes to hint—military 
service in the case of his companions, agricultural labor m the 
case of the peasants. These privileged ones had only to light. 
I hey succeeded so well in enriching themselves that the inon 
archy, whose wealth lay only in landed estates, rapidly saw 
these dwindle. Forced to transfer ever more estates over in these 
feudal lords, royalty became pauperized: when it ran out of 
estates to give, it would no longer be able to command-—the 
feudal system would have devoured its authority. What was left 
* 


FORMATION OF THE EUROPEAN STATES 
V) 
to the monarchy was only the theory of its existence, the fact 
that it was consecrated and that its rank was still called ihe first. 
As for the people, they worked: they fed those who were 
supposed to protect them and whose exactions had now taken a 
Iqr-il turn; the peasants t lie nisei vex their families, and their 
beasts, had to foot the hill. Man was free, hut subject to so 
many kinds of tributes that Ins fate would remain atrocious, lor 
it had become hereditary. . . . 
The constant dangers threatening tins society, its poorly 
upkept roads, the concentration of population, the isolation of 
markets guaranteed the stability' of the new system; its Law 
would entrench itself, as would us terms, ns customs, and its 
morals.1 
The feudal lords invented a series of imposts which be¬ 
came more and more oppressive, as much for free peasants 
(freeholders} as for serfs who were bound to the land. The 
latter could be sold with the land, and could transmit nothing 
by heredity to their descendants, except their condition. W hen 
several lords held rights to the same land, they divided among 
themselves the children of the serfs who cultivated it* Marriage 
was dependent on the will of the lord whose permission had 
to obtained.2 All the apparatus needed for domestic life (m 
oven, etc.) was located at the castle. All the subjects of the 
lord’s domain were required to go and make use of them and 
pay for the privilege. I he technique of the feudal system of 
exploitation, by us exceptionally inhumane character, ex¬ 
plains both the fat-queries which marked the Middle Ages and 
the drive with which the inhabitants of the burgs, better 
concentrated, were to organize in order to wrest political and 
economic liberty from the lords. Commerce which was in full 
J 
bloom (markets, fairs) allowed the artisans and merchants of 
the cities, despite the condition of the roads, to gain enormous 
riches. 
When the lords fell into debt folltwing the Crusades, 
they would be more and more obliged to sell some of the 


40 
PKECOI.ONIAL BLACK AI RI( A 
political and economic liberties to their subjects: Communes 
would buy their political autonomy and form commercial 
confederations, such as the Hanseatic League which grouped 
nearly eighty German towns with Hamburg as their center, 
f hus was born the commercial and industrial bourgeois 
which by developing, organizing, and gaining education, 
would become the preponderant political and economic ele¬ 
ment of the European society that in short order it would 
control. Born in shackles and out ol struggle, this bourgeoisie- 
had to become essentially revolutionary and lay-minded. 
THE INTELLECTUAL MIDDLE ACES 
I lie period ol the Middle Ages has been considered in 
European history as a relatively barbarous epoch of transition 
during which the achievements of antiquity were absolutely 
lost. Most certainly, knowledge regressed enormously, but the 
guiding thread was never totally cut and, as early as the time ot 
Charlemagne, the knowledge which had vegetated in the 
monasteries began to come out. This intellectual movement, 
which spread from Ireland and England over the entire con¬ 
tinent, is undeniable evidence of intellectual continuity- As the 
lurks occupied Constantinople, destroying the Eastern Em¬ 
pire, and Greek scholars fled to the West, this intellectual 
movement gained momentum. The Greek writers who had 
already been given an introduction by the Arabs were now 
more widely available. We have seen that thanks to Avicenna 
and Averrocs Aristotle’s Logic was known and discussed. The 
intellectual influence of Aristotle, the only Greek philosopher 
to be studied, was considerable on the thinkers of the Middle 
Ages. I fis authority was almost sacrosanct: thanks to him, 
they little by little familiarized themselves with the rational, 
scientific manner of thinking. His physics helped the more 
enlightened minds to grasp the idea of positive science di 
voiced from religion. 


FORMATION OF TIU. EUROPEAN STATES 
4J 
|\uil Vignaux has pointed out Alenin\ keen awareness of 
[he ties that united his own time to scholarly antiquity. 
His praise of the sovereign \i harlemagne] in another letter 
defines Alenin s ideal for us: to build in I ranee a new Athens, 
superior to the earlier one, because taught by Christ- Led by 
Plato, the earlier one shone with the seven liberal ails, , , . 
These liberal arts were die culture to he transmitted* Eighty 
years after the death of Alcuin* one chronicler judged his work a 
success; the moderns, whether Gauls or Franks, seemed to him 
the equals of the ancients of Rome and Athens, Chretien de 
Troyes was likewise to express the continuity of civilization. . . . 
At the end of the twelfth century, Paris would seem the new 
Athens.{ 
In the thirteenth century, following Alhazen, the philo¬ 
sophical school of Oxford with Grosseteste and Roger Bacon 
clearly conceived the idea of positive physico-mathematical 
science* 
The disciple [Bacon, the disciple of Grosseteste] realized 
that his master had not followed the path laid out by Aristotle, 
that having known mathematics and optics, lie might have 
known everything, f'he mathematicism of Roger Bacon is the 
sense of potestas mathematical—the ability of this type of 
knowledge to discipline the mind and explain nature.4 
In Le Nombre d'Or (The Golden Number), Matila 
Ghyka demonstrated how vast was the influence of antiquity 
on the esthetic and architectural conceptions of the Renais¬ 
sance. 5 
In these last two chapters we have rapidly reviewed the 
politico-social evolution of the European states from antiquity 
to the formation of the modern nations. The tune has come to 
undertake a detailed comparative study of African politico- 
social organizations* 
N O T E S 
'■ Andre Ribard, / a prodigieuse histoire de I'hutnanite Rim; Ed. du 
Myrte, Collection "Pour comprendve Fhisttm\" 1947), pp. 118—119, 


41 
I1 R H C O LON I A L R LAC K AFRICA 
2> following histel tic Coulanges, we must see serfdom and slavery 
one. 
3> PauJ Vignaux, La Pensie an Mayen Age (Paris: Lib. A. Colin, Colla¬ 
tion Arm and Colin, 1938], ]\ 12. 
4, ldem.t p. 91H 
C Mania Ghyka, Le Nomhre ti'Or: Rites et rythmes pythagorideas dai^ 
le developpement de hi civilisation europeetme (Paris: Gallirnard 
cA, 1974 ’ 
a 


Chapter Four 
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IN 
BLACK AFRICA 
The political organization the principles of which we are 
about to consider is the one which, give or take a few variants, 
seemingly governed the African states from the iirst to the 
nineteenth century. This is what we may assume from the 
testimony of Al Bakri and Ibn Khaldun concerning the Em¬ 
pire of Ghana (tenth and eleventh centuries) and, more re¬ 
cently, of Battuta on the Empire of Mali (i 352-5 3). 
Ghana, Mali, and Songhai were very shortly to become 
Islamized, beginning in the tenth century, under the influence 
of the Almoravidc movement. In order to conic closer to 
historical truth it seems necessary to take as frame of refer- 
cnee, as example for study, the constitution of an African state 
contemporary with these, with a parallel history. In it which, 
because of its southern location (Burkina-Faso of today), was 
nor overrun by Islam. It will thus be possible to bring out the 
modifications of political structure due to external influences. 
CONSTITUTION 
Mossi is a constitutional monarchy. The emperor, the 
More Naba, conies by heredity from the family of the previous 
Mom Naha (eleventh century probably), but his nomination 
,s not automatic. He is chosen by an “electoral” college of 
four dignitaries, presided over by the Prime Minister, the togo 


•44 
PRECO I.ON IA I. BI.ACK AFRICA 
naba, as in Ethiopia.1 lie is actually invested with power by 
the latter who, however, is not a Nakomse (nobleman), hut 
comes from an ordinary family, and who is, in reality, the 
representative of the people, of all free men, all the citizens 
who constitute the Mossi nation. 
The emperor is assisted, in addition to the Prime Muns¬ 
ter, hy three others: the rassam naha, the halum naba, and the 
kidiranga naba. Each of them governs one region in addition 
to his more or less specialized functions. The togo naba is in 
charge of four royal districts: I'ziga, Sissamba, Sontniaga, and 
Bissigai. The togo nabas basically come in turn from three 
families of commoners residing respectively at Toi'si, Kierga, 
and Node, 
Alter the Prime Minister in order of importance comes 
the rassam naha or bingo naba, chief of the slaves of the 
Crown, I k* is also the Minister of Finances, guardian of the 
treasury of precious objects, cowries (coin), bracelets, etc. I k 
is the High Executioner, when occasion arises putting to 
death condemned criminals. He is chief of the blacksmiths 
and governs them through interposition of the saba naba. He 
governs the canton of Kindighi. Therefore, although himself a 
slave, the rassam naba rules over tree men, and holds power 
over full-fledged citizens. We will find the same practice 
among the Wolofs of Cayor Baol and the Serers of Sine Salum 
m Senegal. 
I he balum naba is third in rank: he is Mayor of the 
Palace, in charge of introducing ambassadors and dis¬ 
tinguished visitors. He administers the Zitinga, the Btissti, 
and the Gursi. 
I he kidiranga naha, head of the cavalry, comes from one 
ol three ordinary Mossi families. 
The rassam naha always comes from the same slave fam¬ 
ily. 
Thus, the ministers who assist the emperor, rather than 
being members of the high nobility of the Nakomse, are 


45 
0 I IT11. A I 
ORGANIZATION IN BLACK At RICA 
systematically chosen from outside of it, from among Un¬ 
common people and the slaves. They represent at court, as we 
I, ,)j more clearly see, the different social categories, profes¬ 
sions, and castes. "Those without birth," slaves and laborers, 
organized into professions (castes), far from being kept sepa 
rated from power in this period which extends far beyond the 
Occidental Middle Ages (since, very likely, it may go back to 
the first century and the foundation of Ghana), are associated 
with it, not in any symbolic but in an organic way. Each 
profession has its representatives within the government; they 
will, as needed, present its complaints. 
That is the spirit of this constitution. In order to compre¬ 
hend its originality, we would have to imagine, at midpoint of 
the Middle Ages (135z-vt, the time of Ihn Battuta's voyage to 
the Sudan and of the I lundred Years War), not just some 
provincial lord, but the King of I ranee or of England, giving a 
share of his power, with a voice in decisions* to the rural serfs, 
bound to the soil, the free peasants, the town guildsmcn, and 
the merchants. And beyond all that, imagine the existence of a 
tradition according to which the king, within the framework 
nf an already-constitutional monarchy, cannot reign, cannot 
have moral and political authority in the eyes of the people, 
unless he is invested by a bourgeois who is also chosen from 
among one or a few traditionally determined families. Neither 
the bourgeoisie nor the peasantry ol the West would then have 
had the revolutionary virulence that once imbued them, and 
the course of Western European history would probably have 
been different. 
The non-absolute nature of the monarchy is revealed by 
the fact that, once invested, the ministers cannot be removed 
by the king. 
Below the ministers come servants of all categories, bu¬ 
reaucrats and military chiefs. The samandc naba is the infan¬ 
try general: he is not allowed to ride a horse, but at most only 
111 ass, for, since be is a slave, the horse is too noble a steed for 


46 l'RF,COLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
him; however, in some cases, he mav replace the tngn nal\[ 
the IVimc Minister. The kom naba is leader of the slave 
soldiers; lie cannot command free soldiers. The tom naba is ui 
charge of the "Sand of Investiture.” We will return to this 
ceremony in dealing with the coronation of the King. 
In its general lines, this is the structure of the council the 
emperor depends on in order to govern. All derails concerning 
it are to be found in Tauxicr.' Before analyzing any more 
deeply the political organization of the African states, we mnM 
briefly consider the principles of the Constitution of Caynr. 
Despite the historical or rather geographic distance separat¬ 
ing them, they appear to be a replica of those of the Mossi. 
THE CONSTITUTION OF CAYOR 
At the height of the power of (.liana, that is, probabh 
from the third to the tenth century, tropical Africa as far as the 
Atlantic Ocean was ruled by it. Cayor was in all likelihood a 
former province of Ghana which, in the sixteenth century at 
the time when the author of the lari kb es Sudan was writing, 
had already become emancipated into an autonomous king 
dom, independent of that of the Djoloff, with a Daniel at us 
head,3 
1 he government council which invested the king was 
constituted as follows: 
La mam: Dramutil 
Hut a I ub Ndioh 
Bailie Gateignc 
Eli man of MBalle 
Serigne of the village 
of Kab 
representatives of free men, men of 
castes or without castes, gor, ger, or 
fieno 
representatives of the Muslim clergy 
Diawcrigne MBul Gallo representatives of the Tieddos ami 
Diaraf Bum Kit prisoners of the Crown, 


pOl'lTICA!- °RGAN1ZATION IN BLACK AFRICA 47 
The council was convened and presided over by the Di- 
ivverigne Mllul Diambur, hereditary representative of free 
nien. 
The Ticddos comprised all the individuals attached to the 
kitifh whether as soldiers or courtiers. That at least is the 
meaning of the term retained at the end of the independence of 
Cayor, engineered by Faidherbe under Napoleon III. 
This constitution was therefore in effect until 1870. I liis 
fact shows that African political constitutions had not appre¬ 
ciably changed with time. Only in the cases where the royal 
branch became Islamizcd do we see certain transformations. 
That was the case of Ghana, Mali, and Scmghai. 
The seven Cayorian dynasties, to which we will return in 
discussing succession to the throne, never embraced Islam. It 
scents that one of the last Daniels of Cayor, l.atdjor Diop, the 
very one who had offered such determined resistance to 
Faidherbe, the symbol of national struggle in Senegal, con¬ 
verted to Islam for diplomatic reasons, in order to find new 
allies in Salum, such as the luculor marabout Ma Ba Diakhu, 
and in Trarza. It was also customary to oppose the Ticddos to 
the Donti Sokhna. The latter were the constituent element of 
the Muslim clergy. They were separate front the traditional 
priests, and the two groups shared a reciprocal hatred and 
fought each other without mercy, for there was no possible 
common ground between them. The Donti Sokhna had the 
characteristic of being most often members of the nobility; 
they came from the same social class as the aristocrats, but 
because of their conversion to Islam were despised and dis¬ 
owned by their blood brothers. It often happened that the 
latter, because of the matriarchy then in effect, would kidnap 
their daughters in order to give them in marriage to licddos, 
thus, as they saw it, limiting the damage done. 
The Mossi and Cayorian constitutions reflect a political 
organization which must have been in effect since Ghana, and 
therefore probably dominated the African states for nearly two 
thousand years. 


PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
Actually, we have fewer details concerning the constitu 
tion of Ghana. Bakri relates that the kind's interpreters wuv 
often chosen from among the Muslims; likewise, the steward 
of the Treasury and the majority of viziers.4 I here is then every 
reason to believe that in 1067, at the time Bakri wrote, Isl.i- 
mization of Ghana, though still only very slight, had already 
influenced its political customs. 
The political constitution of Songhai, as it is revealed in 
us through the text of the Tarikh es Sudan, which dates from 
the sixteenth century, shows an identical situation. The same 
must also have been true in Mali, and Ibn Khaldun gives the 
name of us first Islamizcd king, Bermendana.s 
MATRI LINEAL SUCCESSION: GHANA, MALI 
Within the framework of the rites governing succession to 
the throne and appointment of the various ministers and 
functionaries of the empires, we can best sense the changes 
made in the constitutions as a result of foreign influences, In 
Ghana, the old African tradition was still strictly observed. 
Bakri is formal on the subject: succession was matrilineal, 
Only the emperor and his heir apparent, his sister’s son, were 
allowed to wear cut anti sewn garments. In 1067, the sov¬ 
ereign of Bakri’s time was the Tunka Men in, who had sue 
eeeded his maternal uncle Bessi. 
Among this people, custom and rules demand that the 
successor to the king he liis sister's son; for, they say, the 
sovereign can be sure that his nephew is indeed his sister's son; 
but nothing can assure him that the son he considers his own m 
actuality is/’ 
I he custom of rnatrilineal succession can be accepted, 
without necessarily attaching any importance to the justifica¬ 
tion given for it, although the latter seems convincing. This 
explanation, very often heard in Black Africa, considerably 


pO htig a t. ORGANIZATION IN BLACK AFRICA 
49 
po stdates the claiiic conditions of economic life which gave 
[,jrth to the matriarchy.7 
Since the succession to the throne was so strictly regu¬ 
lated, one must suppose that the appointment of the various 
ministers had not yet become, as it would five centuries later in 
Songhai, a purely administrative act, made practically without 
regard to tradition. 
Ghana was weakened by the Sussu (Sosso) attacks. In 
rz42, the king of the exterior province of Mali would seize it. 
He was Sundiara Kcita, one of the greatest of all the empire- 
builders of Black Africa. Mali then would take the place of 
Ghana by subduing the Sossos. We know that Bermendana 
was the first of its kings to become Islamizcd. I bn Khaldun 
gives some interesting details on the succession to the throne 
of Mali: it was still matrilmeal. Mari Djata {djata is “lion” in 
Mandingo; djat, “to ward off the lion” in Wolof) was the first 
powerful monarch of Mali: It was he who put down the 
turbulence of the Sossos and deprived them of any type of 
sovereignty. His son, Mensa Wcli, succeeded him, then his 
brother Watt, and Khalifa, another brother. After the destruc¬ 
tion of Ghana, there seems to have been a period of turmoil 
and political instability, during which the traditional rules of 
succession were temporarily disregarded. J his is confirmed by 
the reign of Khalifa, an unworthy and bloody prince, who 
spent his time shooting at passersby with bow and arrow. 1 he 
people, instead of challenging the monarchy, got rid of him by 
murdering him and returned to the traditional matrilincal 
rule of succession. 
Abu-Bekr, the son of Mari-Djatas daughter, succeeded to 
the throne. He was chosen king according to the principle of 
the barbaric nations which place the sister (of the deceased 
monarch) or that sister’s son in possession of the throne. We did 
not learn the paternal genealogy of this prince. At his death by a 
freed man of the royal family, the usurper Sakura, seized power.8 


5° 
FKECOLONIAL liLACK AFRICA 
Ibn Battuta, in his voyage to the Sudan, gives precious 
information about imperial audiences in Mali. The king was 
assisted by several ferraris, each of whom maintained a small 
court of his own, in the manner of Mossi or Cayorian minis¬ 
ters. However, we have no details about the manner in which 
they were selected. The author, on the other hand, relates that 
civil inheritance, on the level of the common people, was 
matrilineal, and expresses surprise at having come across such 
a practice only among the Blacks of Africa and India. I le also 
informs us that the child bears the name of his maternal unde, 
the one whose heir he is to be. The same method of inheri¬ 
tance thus applied in the case of both the common people and 
the aristocracy.9 
SONGHAl, THE ORIENTAL INFLUENCE 
Songhai, which belongs to the last phase of the Islami/a- 
tion of sixteenth-century Africa, had political customs less 
embedded in tradition. I hey in every way resemble those 
which applied in the caliphates of Baghdad and the courts of 
the Arab Orient. Ihe same endless intrigues took place 
around the throne. Islamic Songhai seems to have recognized 
only the right of primogeniture; but that was purely the¬ 
oretical, for the eldest son, if not energetic, or disadvantaged 
ever so little by circumstances, automatically lost his right to 
the throne, giving way to another son of the late Askia or any 
other intriguing personage who succeeded in gaining the sup¬ 
port of some influential high functionary. The right of pri¬ 
mogeniture was so fragile in the minds and consciences of the 
royal electors that it seemed normal automatically to dis¬ 
regard the eldest heir if he happened to be away at the rime of 
the election. This was in no way a sanction against a son guilty 
of the crime of not assisting his father in his dying moments, as 
one might suppose. Upon the death of the Askia Daud, the 
eldest of the sons who were at his bedside, El I iadj, took up 


political organization in black Africa 
51 
his arms and mounted his horse as a sign of taking power. As 
he was more audacious and more energetic than his brothers 
and all the courtiers feared him, for he knew how to counter 
their intrigues, they all acquiesced, even adding to his claims. 
They proclaimed him king (Askia), adding that “El Had) 
deserved power and would have been worthy to hold it even in 
Baghdad.”10 El Hadj, with his entourage, left for Kao Kao, or 
Gao, the capital of the empire. An incident which occurred on 
the road, as a result of the intrigues of one of his brothers, 
Hamed, allows us to form our own opinion of how they 
regarded the question of succession. One of the brothers of the 
new Askia addressed him in the following manner: “We admit 
only the right of primogeniture. If Mohammed-Beukan [the 
absent firstbornj had been present this day, the power would 
not have fallen to you.”'1 An Askia deposed by his brother did 
not have the right to take his sons into exile with him. I hey 
automatically went under the “paternal” authority of the vic¬ 
torious ruling brother and were in line to succeed him. 1 hat is 
the reason why the hi-kot who stripped Askia Ishaq II of the 
royal insignia after his defeat at Djuder pointed out to him that 
he did not have the right to take his sons with him. To which 
the Askia answered that he had been defeated by an alien who 
was succeeding him and not by a brother. 
The sons of Bcnkan were compelled to hide all through 
the reign of El Hadj, for fear of being murdered as legitimate 
claimants to the throne. This would continue during the reign 
of Askia Mohammed Bra no and they would not be seen again 
Until the interregnum which preceded the advent of Askia 
It very often happened that a given courtier was responsi¬ 
ble for a prince’s accession to the throne. According to the 
Tarikh es Sudan (Chapter XV), Askia Ismael was elevated to 
the throne by the dendi-fari Mar-Tomzo on the very day his 
predecessor was deposed; and a dendi-fari was merely the 
governor of a province. 
Succession to the throne could cause troubles even in 


5Z 
PRECOLONIAL liLACK AFRICA 
filial relations. Thus, fari-mondzo Mussa revolted against his 
father, Askia El-Had) Mohammed, deposed him, and took his 
place. After which, he attempted to exterminate his brothers, a 
certain number of whom escaped to Tendirma and the protec¬ 
tion of the kormina-fari Otsman-Yubado (Chapter XIV;. 
Brothers of the same father, under the African system of 
polygamous life, were social rivals and did not hesitate to 
eliminate one another when a matter as important as succes¬ 
sion to the throne was involved: Askia Mussa’s struggle 
against his brothers was systematic and unmerciful. Nor was 
this any longer an isolated case; it became the usual practice 
in Songhai. All the Askias except Askia Mohammed were 
sons of “concubines,”15 according to Kati (Chapter VI, p. 
151). Whereas the reverse was true for the kings of Bara: 
which would explain the respect that the Askias showed them. 
The latter were compelled to consider the advice of the bara- 
kots. Bara-koi Mansa Kintadc, whose mother was a slave, was 
the only one born of a “concubine.” 
The administrative organization and its extreme cen¬ 
tralism will he described later on. However, we can note here 
and now that there were provincial governors of varying im¬ 
portance, such as the fari, the balama, etc,; there were also 
governors of towns and of border marches such as the koi, 
mondzo, farba, etc. As against the custom in force in Mossi 
and Cayor, the Askia appears to have appointed them ar¬ 
bitrarily; he might name to these important positions his son 
or any other person of his entourage. There was no shortage 
of intrigues among the candidates; there was often actual 
bargaining with the Askia, almost a contractual agreement: 
“Make me the Balama; I will make vou the Askia.” 
Ismael, at bis accession, was obliged to give satisfaction to 
a courtier, by giving him a higher position than the one he 
had hoped for, 
Army generals were no longer—as among the Mossi and 
Wolofe—chosen systematically from among slaves; they could 
be any kind of citizens, perhaps even nobles. After having 


POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IN BLACK AFRICA 
53 
suffered a defeat in the Kama, Askia Mohammed Benkan 
wanted to reestablish his prestige by attacking Gorina; to his 
utter disappointment, his general Dankolko, completely ab¬ 
sorbed in a game of chess, remained unaware ol the proximity 
of the enemy who took the field. The king dismissed him, but 
the general asked for authorization first to name his own 
successor; the king appeared to give him satisfaction, hut did 
not keep his promise. The spirit in which army chiefs and 
functionaries were appointed is thus made abundantly 
dear.14 
Under the reign of Askia Daud (advent March 2,4, 1549), 
the kormina-fari El-Hadi revolted against the Askia. The hi- 
koi, Bokar-Chili-Idji, said to the king, “Appoint me to the 
office of Dendi-Eari and [ promise to take El-Hadi and turn 
him over to you." And it was done.1' 
There was one characteristic object among the royal in¬ 
signia of the Askias: the tm-touri (“kindling wood” in Song- 
hai). It was supposed to be a dead ember from the first fire lit 
in the country by its first occupants, lfhe members of this 
family transmitted this emblem from one generation to the 
next. I hus making them the masters of the soil. 
What we have just said about the origins of the Askias 
shows that they were not the masters of the soil, but usurped 
this emblem in order themselves to embody the various at¬ 
tributed of sovereignty.16 
The political customs of Songhai in every way recall those 
illustrated by the tragic end of the grandson of the Prophet 
Mohammed, Hussein, who was murdered at Kcrbela (Ara¬ 
bia). The custom even spread of cutting off the heads of 
defeated pretenders to the throne and bringing them to the 
Askia as a pledge of devotion: this was also the fate of the 
descendants of the Prophet. 
precedence in songhai 
Kati gives details of the greatest importance about the 
hierarchy of positions in Songhai under Askia Mohammed. 


54 
PRECOLON f A L BLACK AFRICA 
The djina-koi' (generalissimo, commander of the Van¬ 
guard") was the only one in the entire army entitled to sit on 1 
rug during the audience with the king; he covered himself 
with flour instead of dust. 
The kurmina-fari or kan-fari, whose residence was at 
Tindirna, was a veritable viceroy. He did not have to take off 
his headgear or cover his head with dust* 
The dendi-fari, governor of one of the most important 
provinces of the empire, the one bordering on Upper 
Dahomey, was the only one who could speak frankly to the 
king without fear. 
The bara-koi's alone had the right of veto* It will he 
recalled that all of them (with one exception) were born of 
noble women, in contrast to the Askias, all of whom (with 
one exception) were sons of slaves, of "concubines," according 
to the same author. The prince was obliged to heed their veto 
willy-nilly* One gets the impression that the bara-koi’s must 
have been the former legitimate masters of the soil from whom 
the Askias usurped the tin-touri, that emblem of power of the 
earliest occupants of the land* 
The dirma-koi alone could enter the enclosure of the 
imperial palace on horseback. 
Only the cadi could employ the servants of the king, I le 
was entitled to a mat when he came visiting, 
1 he guissirbdonke alone could question the king dur ing 
an audience. 
Only a Shcrif could sir next to him on his “platform." 
Eunuchs (an Oriental custom introduced into Africa with 
Islam) stood to the left of the Askia, who rose only for 
scholars and returning pilgrims. 
The Askia ate only with Sherds, scholars, and their chil¬ 
dren, as well as with the “San,” even when these were very 
young. The latter, whose district in Timbuktu was San-Kore 
(from which the university got its name), constitute the au¬ 
thentic noble class. It should be remembered that meals were 
eaten sitting on mats around one common platter. 
J 


POLITIC A I ORGANIZATION IN BLACK AFRICA 
5 5 
Kati attributes all these institutions to Askia Mohammed 
exclusively, as it they had not existed before his reign and 
survived him only partially. 
In reality; Kati and Sadi, being fervent believers, tend 
excessively to embellish the reign of Askia Mohammed and 
attribute to him even part of the glory of his predecessors. It is 
unlikely that institutions so entrenched and so detailed could 
be of so recent invention. 
The attributes of the bara-kot show that they reflect a 
tradition much older than the advent of the Askias. The 
explanation suggested by the author concerning these at¬ 
tributes merely confirms this point of view.1 
The bara-koi who accompanied the Askia on the pil¬ 
grimage presumably took advantage of their presence to¬ 
gether at the Kaaba to hind the Askia by an oath at the tomb 
of the Prophet: “Promise me that henceforth you will abide by 
my counsel," whence the right of veto * * * "I promise you!" 
* . ■ and so forth* 
The author was not able to show by what necessity the 
Askia, sovereign of all, voluntarily and so easily allowed him¬ 
self to be bound by these oaths. 
It is notable that, in Mossi country where African tradi¬ 
tion remained in effect, only one case of political conflict 
around succession to the throne is cited, in the whole history 
of Mossi, although it is longer than that of Songhai. 1'hat was 
the struggle of Tuguri against the naba Ba-Ogo, in the nine¬ 
teenth century, hence in very recent times, at the end of Mossi 
history. 
THE CASE OF CAYOR 
1 he political situation in Cayor was halfway between that 
°f Mossi and that of Songhai. All political positions below 
that of the king were hereditary. It was impossible arbitrarily 
to assign one to anyone who did not have a right to it by virtue 


56 
PRECO LO N 1 A L 15 LACK AFRICA 
of belonging to the corresponding caste. Until Faidherbe, the 
Badie Gateigncs, the Botalub NDiobs, the Lamane Diamarils, 
etc., came exclusively from the same families; apart from 
competition between family members, there was no intrigue 
possible regarding these successions. 
The situation was different in the case of the king. At the 
end of Cayorian history, there were seven dynasties of garni is, 
or nobles, each with an equal right to the throne. All being of 
different origins, they were in perpetual rivalry, Unlucky 
claimants were frequently sent into exile. The djtn was a 
common practice: this consisted of beating the tom-tom and 
calling out the name of the prince being banished and out¬ 
lawed, He then emigrated to another more receptive kingdom, 
If circumstances were favorable, if he could muster forces by 
buying slaves or getting some from the hospitable king, if Ik- 
kept in contact with the dissidents in Cayor, if he established 
sustained relations with the Diaraff N’Diambur, who made 
and broke Darnels, his return to the throne might be assured. 
It often happened that in utmost secrecy the Diaraff NPDiam- 
bur sent for an exiled prince, to place him on the throne, if the 
reigning king displeased the people. It seems that it was in this 
way that Mao, one of the bravest princes of the Dorohe 
dynasty, acceded to the throne. Prior to the Cayorian mon¬ 
archy, it seems the country was divided into landed “estates" 
belonging to the Serers: these native lords were called 
La manes, a term which means “successorv in Scrcr and 
Tu color. The kings who, around the fourteenth century, con¬ 
secrated this organization seem all to have come from outside: 
they were immigrant kings, rebel lions, exiled, hunted princes, 
perhaps from Mali, Songhai, or Ghana, who had gone to seek 
their fortune in an outer province of the empire, and willingly 
led an uprising in it if necessary to gain control. It was 
common for members of the nobility, who had tasted power at 
home but lost it, to go and look for it elsewhere. I he history 
of the Macina provides a typical example. One of the early 


POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IN BLACK AFRICA 
57 
kings of this country, Djadji, wanted to marry his brother's 
widow, who turned him down. He began to hate his other 
brother Maghan, whom he believed responsible for her rejec¬ 
tion. Maghan emigrated to the home of the Baghena-fari, the 
governor of the region situated north of the Upper Sencgal- 
Niger. He was welcomed and invited to settle wherever lie 
wished, within the province: in addition, he was recognized as 
king of all those who had accompanied him into exile, instead 
of being treated as a prisoner by the Fari. Some other Reuls of 
the Tcrmes region from which became soon joined him. Such, 
according to the I'atikh es Sudan, was the origin of the 
dynasty that reigned in the Macina, the territory chosen by 
Maghan. 
Generally speaking, these outside kings did not in any 
way modify the sociopolitical structure they found established 
in the area. We can then see why the less important traditions 
remained unchanged while transformation occurred only at 
the royal level. And one can readily conceive that such kings 
could not be sacrosanct in t he eyes of the people. There was no 
worship of them; they were just lieddos embodying brute 
force. They form a third category of African kings who must 
he distinguished from both the traditional kings who, with 
their people, retained their religion (Mossi: Moro Naha; 
Yoruba: Alafin of Oyo), and the Islamized kings (Songhai, 
Futa-Toro, Fu ta-D jail on). 
Until the conquest of Senegal, the seven Cayorian dynas¬ 
ties systematically refused to embrace the Islamic religion, 
whose followers were scorned and often mistreated. These 
dynasties were: the Muyoy, Sqg.no, Ouagadou, Guelewar, 
Do robe, Guedj, and Bey. 
We know very little about the origin of the Muyoys, The 
Sognos are considered to he Soees. The Ouagadou dynasty 
was founded by Detie Fu N’Diogu Fall: it was the very first; its 
name brings to mind the cradle of Ghana; its creator, says 
tradition, baptized ii with this name in remembrance of his 


58 
PRECOLON] A], BLACK AFRICA 
mother's native country. The Guelewar were probably a Man- 
dingo aristocracy who went to rule over the Scrers of Sine- 
Salum: a tradition common to the history of both countries 
tends to confirm this origin. We know with certainty that 
according to tradition Sudiata Keita, king of the Mandingo, 
had been helped by his sister to triumph over his enemies; in 
exchange for this service he instituted a matrilineal succession 
in the royal branch. The present-day Guelewars of Sine-Salmn 
also claim that matrilineal filiation was introduced among 
them in the same circumstances. This was confirmed for me 
by a conversation I had with bode Diouf, head of the province 
of Salum and traditional king of this country, during his visit 
in Paris in 1956. 
As for the Dorobe, although they do not like to admit it, 
they seem originally to have been IVul, or Tueulor. Indeed, 
there presently exists, among the Mossi, in Upper Volta (Bur- 
kina-Faso), a Peul clan called Toronibe. Also at Futa- loro, 
there is the Tueulor clan of loro be, which supported Ousman 
Dan Fodio. The be is merely a plural ending in Peul and in 
Tueulor. Torombe, Torobe, and Dorobe seem to he only vari¬ 
ants of the same word derived from Toro. Moreover, the very 
names of the first ruling princes of this dynasty—Mao, for 
example—prove that they were Penis or Tueulor. I hc Dorohcs 
differed from the other dynasties in that the king actually took 
command of his army, instead of remaining at the rear and 
communicating orders; in defeat, he must die at the site. 
Members of the dynasty who survive a defeat are excluded 
from it, if not in fact, at least in effect. Such was the case of the 
Daniel Madiodio who, starting in 1861, was defeated several 
times by Fat-Dior, without committing suicide; since he 
dared to survive a defeat, in the popular mind he was no 
longer worthy of being a Dorobe. 
The Guedj come from common people. They are dis¬ 
tinguished by their adaptive ability and their military' genius. 
The dynasty is named for the country of origin of the first 


POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IN BLACK AFRICA 
59 
founding Daniel’s mother. She was a commoner from the 
seacoast, who married the king; guedj meaning "sea” in 
Wolof. Her son, though he had no right to the throne, suc¬ 
ceeded in being crowned, through his energy and mental 
agility, 
i he Beys were in the beginning merely a good-luck fam¬ 
ily among whom pretenders to the throne went to select 
virgins. According to a curious tradition, it was enough to 
have contact with a virgin daughter of this family for one's 
chances of accession to the throne to increase seriously. The 
family, then, progressively became an integral part of royalty. 
As can be seen from the above, within each of these 
dynasties, succession to the throne was matrilineal. The dy¬ 
nastic founders remembered only their mothers or sisters, 
whose names were sacred; this was also true for the sons of 
Congo or Konko Mussa. Congo Mussa was one of the most 
powerful emperors of Mali, and Congo was the name of his 
mother, according to Kati.1* Thus, it was the existence of 
several parallel, rival dynasties that introduced so many prob¬ 
lems into the succession to the throne of Cavor. 
SIGNIFICANCE OF ROYALTY 
The Vitaltst Concept 
The African universe was run in a strictly orderly man¬ 
ner, metaphysically speaking. The works of Marcel Griaule, 
Germaine Dieterlen, and lather I'empels revealed these funda¬ 
mental ideas to the West. 
According to Hr. Tcmpels, the Universe was ruled hy only 
one set of hierarchic forces: every being, animate or inanimate, 
could occupy only a specific place according to his or its 
potential. These forces were cumulative: thus, a living being 
who had as talisman the fang or daw of a lion, in which the 


F
60 
PRRCO I-O N 1A L B LAC K AF R I C A 
vital force of the animal was concentrated, increased his own 
power by that much. In order to overcome him in battle, one 
had to have a sum of forces greater than his own plus the 
lion’s, Therefore, the struggle between two kings was, above 
all, a magic struggle on the level of these vital forces; it took 
place long before the physical combat in the arena, around the 
water jugs and libation stumps set up in the ground, during 
the night, in the sacred groves. We can be sure that, from the 
beginning of African history until the conquest by the West, 
each traditional king before going into combat indulged in 
these practices, and therefore firmly believed that victory was 
on his side, Islamization did not change this: it just displaced 
the center of interest, instead of turning to the traditional 
priests who mediated between them and the hidden forces of 
the universe, the princes now went to the Muslim clergy, the 
marabouts who practiced Eastern Kabbalah and gave them 
grigris to assure their victory. 
This metaphysics, far from constituting a minor fact in 
African historical sociology, was a predominant trait. If scien¬ 
tific explanation ignores it, all that it will grasp will be lifeless, 
external forms with no apparent logical connection. No one 
has revealed the internal logic of this African society better 
than Marcel Griaule, as has been pointed out by Andre Leroi- 
Gourhan and Jean Poirier: 
All work and human activities ♦ * , remind us of [universal 
movement]: pottery, cattle breeding, dance, music, decoration, 
and particularly the prestigious art of the forge—the Monitor 
was a blacksmith—the rhythm of the bellows and anvil of 
which inspired the first dance . . , The world is ordered like a 
vast equation; human animation corresponds to the animation 
of nature, and each gesture extends hack to ns mythical prece¬ 
dents. The Black African world which seemed to some so 
simple is simple indeed, but only because of its internal logic. It 
is very complicated in appearance; creation takes on a sense 
that can be called philosophical, ii he Black Universe had 
seemed crude; it now turns out to be profoundly elaborate.1'1 


POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IN BLACK AFRICA 
6 I 
Within the framework of this universal harmony, in 
which each being has his place, the king has a precise func¬ 
tion, a definite role: he must be the one with the greatest vital 
force in the whole kingdom. Only in this way can he serve as 
mediator—he being sacrosanct—with the superior universe, 
without creating any break, any catastrophic upheaval within 
the ontological forces. If he is not a legitimate king, fulfilling 
these exact conditions of established filiation, and appointed 
according to the rites of tradition, all of nature will be sterile, 
drought will overtake the fields, women will no longer bear 
children, epidemics will strike the people. As long as the 
tradition was carried on in isolation from external influences, 
die king fulfilled a function in which no usurper could replace 
him. The obligations were strict and the succession to the 
throne was practically without incident, as we have seen 
among the Mossi. The council which convened to invest the 
king (More Naha) in reality examined the degree of legitimacy 
of the different claimants: it was not actually an election—the 
term is improper—for they were compelled after a thorough 
enlightened examination of each case to appoint, not accord¬ 
ing to their preferences, but in accordance with tradition, the 
one who had all the requisite qualities. 
Along the same lines, when the level of vital force of even 
a legitimate king decreased, he was put to death, either actu¬ 
ally as was apparently the case in the beginning, or later on, 
with evolution, symbolically. This was the general practice in 
Black Africa and ancient Egypt, where the symbolic execution 
coincided with the festival of Zed. By this means, the king was 
supposed to die and be born again, revitalized; he regained 
the vigor of his youth, he was once again lit to rule. This same 
practice is found among the Yoruba, Dagomba, Tchamba, 
Djukon, Igara, Songhai, Wuadai, Hatissa of the Gobir, Kat- 
sena, and Daoura, the Shillucks, among the Mbutn, in 
Uganda-Ruanda, in what was ancient Meroe.20 
In Cayor, a king could not rule when wounded, probably 


6 2 
l> RECOLONIAL II LACK AFRICA 
because bis vital force was thus decreased. In any case, ii was 
said chat it would bring bad luck to the people. The king, and 
all those who assumed high responsibilities, whether tem¬ 
poral or spiritual leaders, were considered mystically supe¬ 
rior, whence the Wolof expression ap bop (having more head, 
in the metaphysical sense). That meant that those who might 
go against their will, or who tried to contest their authority, 
might go mad as a result. 
The king is truly guarantor of the ontological, and there¬ 
fore the terrestrial and social, order. It is remarkable that not 
one African constitution provided for his replacement during 
the interregnum following his death for the maintenance ol 
material order: whenever the throne was vacant, whatever tin- 
reason, social anarchy descended upon the people. I he pris¬ 
ons were emptied among the Mossi, without any representa¬ 
tive of the law intervening to oppose it. Ihe situation was 
identical, perhaps worse, in Songhai, even though ii was Isla- 
mized. "I he Irffikh c’s Stuiatt reports that Askia Id Hadj (acces¬ 
sion: August 7,1581) had Mohammed Benkan imprisoned at 
Kan at o on the advice of Amar-ben-Jsliaq-Btr-Askia. I he tluee 
sons ol Benkan—Bit, Kato, and Hindu stayed in hiding 
through the entire reign of I I Hadj and that ol Bano, Ins 
successor. But they took advantage of the interregnum be¬ 
tween the death of Bano and the accession of Askia Ishaq II, to 
come out ol hiding with impunity and do everything they 
could to kill Amar, who was responsible for their misfortunes. 
The latter, warned in time, disguised himself in order to 
escape certain death, which would have gone unpunished. But 
he shed his disguise immediately after the crowning of the new 
Askia, “for, the disturbed situation having come to an end, no 
one could then commit an act of aggression against an¬ 
other.”21 
Most assuredly, in Songhai this was a vestige of a reli¬ 
gious past the death of which had not yet been fully incorpo¬ 
rated into the existing institutions. Ihe ontological function 


POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IN BLACK AFRICA 
6 3 
of the king had not yet been forgotten. Under the Moroccan 
occupation, Pasha All ben Adb-el-Kader on June 19, 1631, 
launched a surprise attack on the citv of Gao; he was defeated 
by the inhabitants, who seized his treasure and his wife. 1 hey 
also captured Prince Bcnkan, the descendant of the Askias, 
who accompanied him. However, the latter was treated with 
much respect “and the people of Gao asked him to come and 
live amongst them, so they might thus obtain the blessings of 
heaven.”22 
Obligations of the King 
The l ondoko Borhom, “Lord of the Maeina" (1610), 
thought that any person invested with royal authority was the 
servant and shepherd ol his people.21 
Although the major figure of the country, the king was 
therefore no less obliged to lead a life strictly regulated by 
custom. Among the Mossi, his schedule was planned down to 
the slightest details. The Moro Naha did not have the right to 
leave Ouagadougou, his capital, not because of royal pride, 
but because ritual forbade it; that is no longer true today, as 
traditions are beginning to fade. However, the Mossi emperor 
Nassere, who laid siege to Ghana and fought against Sonni 
Ali and Askia Mohammed, must have broken this rule be¬ 
cause of the great danger which menaced his kingdom. In¬ 
deed, he is said to have directed in person the expedition 
against Ghana. 
It may also he that this tradition is recent and was insti¬ 
tuted only at the height of the Mossi empire. 
The life of the Kaya-Magha of Ghana was as strictly 
governed by tradition as that of the Pharaoh of Ugypt: each 
morning, he rode around his capital on horseback, followed 
by his entire court, preceded by giraffes and elephants, ac¬ 
cording to Idrisi. Anyone who had a complaint could at that 
tune address him and submit his case, which he settled on the 


64 
PKECO LON IA I, BLACK AFKICA 
spot. In the afternoon, he traveled the same route alone, and 
no one was allowed to speak to him. These kings were some¬ 
times so conscious of their role that they tried in every way to 
maintain contact with the people, to investigate grievances 
directly, so as to feel its political and social pulse, whatever the 
cost. Thus, the Moro Naba disguised himself at night and 
went through the lower-class neighborhoods of his capital in 
absolute anonymity, listening to conversations. So did certain 
Darnels of Cayor, but it must he recognized that they did this 
as a ruse, to sound out public opinion for personal reasons: to 
safeguard their power and prevent palace revolutions in this 
climate of dynastic rivalry, they had to keep constantly in¬ 
formed. 
However, the concept of royalty in Diara or Kaniaga in 
the Termes region, not far from Upper Senegal, was rather 
original. The king was obliged to remain in his palace ami 
never leave it. Tie was surrounded by no pomp at all. Appar¬ 
ently, the people paid very little attention to him, not out of 
disdain but because they felt a king was great enough in 
himself not to need all these external signs of majesty. ... Its 
inhabitants were not Peuls, and harbored against the nomadic 
Penis a hatred typical of sedentary peoples. This kingdom was 
at first governed hereditarily by the Niakkate (Diakkate), then 
by the Diawara. With its army of two thousand horsemen, it 
was dependent first on Ghana, then on Mali. 1 he inhabitants 
revolted and murdered the representative of Mali. But it can¬ 
not be affirmed that their concept of royalty grew out of that 
revolt.24 
The traditional kings thus governed with minimal con¬ 
straint, except for such administrative abuses as were com¬ 
mitted by civil servants, which will be discussed in chapter 
VIII. The tax system they established appeared not as exploi¬ 
tation, but as the part of one’s goods and crops that ritual 
decreed must be turned over to the sacrosanct authority who 
linked the two worlds, so that order might he maintained in 
the universe and nature continue to be fruitful. 


POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IN BLACK AFRICA 
65 
Actually, the historical reality is less sublime: this almost 
divine order of things must have begun to degenerate from the 
very start. The description given above reflects an ideal situa¬ 
tion which was not always realized because of the need for an 
administration dependent on an army of civil servants. But, in 
either case, the evolution of the system never gave rise to a 
revolution. Ghana probably experienced the reign of a corrupt 
dynasty' between the sixth and the eighth centuries. Kars tells 
of an extremely violent revolt of the masses against it. The 
members of that dynasty were systematically massacred. In 
order to wipe it out completely, the rebels went so far as to 
extract fetuses from the wombs of women of the royal family. 
Yet this did not constitute a revolution, for the monarchy itself 
was not eliminated; it was apparently not even seriously ques¬ 
tioned. 
Filiation was matrilineal: the emperor Kanissa-ai, con¬ 
temporaneous with the prophet Mohammed (sixth century), 
had chosen as his capital not Ghana but Koranga, the native 
city of his mother.-- 
The practice of matriarchy from the beginning in the 
royal succession is an important argument against those who 
support the theory that Ghana might have been founded by 
Semites, for the latter recognized only patrilineal filiation. 
Whatever our present attitude toward this metaphysics of 
social positions, this ontology, for more than two thousand 
years it ruled in an absolute manner the minds and con¬ 
sciences of our ancestors: it explains, to a certain extent, their 
failure or success when confronted with the tasks of civiliza¬ 
tion. This is why it cannot be too minor a factor in the 
i 
historical explanation; we cannot fail to consider it. 
Separation of Secular ami Religious 
In pagan antiquity, as in traditional Africa, secular and 
religious powers were long identified one with the other. As a 
consequence of Christianity and Islam, they were separated in 


66 
I’RF.COLON 1 A I. B 1. ACK AFRICA 
both places, in the sense that the king no longer performed 
religious services even when, with I’cpin the Short, he once 
again became sacrosanct, hi Arabia, Islam blotted from the 
mind of the people the very memory of Sabaism: a new 
religious order, which seemed to emerge from the absolute, 
blended with the secular in the social organization. I he re¬ 
gime of the caliphates rapidly evolved into a theocratic mon 
archy. No more Sabean king vegetating, like a fossil, next to 
the Kaaba. This would obtain in all the Arab kingdoms, of 
Egypt, North Africa, and Spain. In Black Africa, the social 
order remained practically as it had been before Islamization; 
hut in those places where the people and the king became 
Islamized, one particular fact appeared. The king no longer 
exercised a religious function; he was progressively seen 
lari/cd, and was seen now only as a simple temporal governor 
of the country. He was not like those Islamic empire builders, 
propagators of the faith who established themselves as kings 
after the conquest of a country, thereby becoming sacred 
beings uniting the two powers in themselves. 
He was no longer a preacher; the halo of holiness which 
surrounded him was progressively to fall onto the shoulders of 
representatives of the foreign religion (a Muslim clergy oi 
lower-class origin), whereas he, the king, more and more sym¬ 
bolized the secular with its implications of coercion and ad 
ministrative impositions. Under the influence of religion, lu 
would progressively he discredited and considered the very 
incarnation of Satan. What had created his spiritual force, was 
traditional religion; that, along with the cosmogony, justified 
his place in society. When those were overcome by the “for¬ 
eign" religion, the same fate would befall the institutions to 
which they had given rise. 
If this analysis is correct with regard to the king who 
preserved Ins religion and ruled over an Islamized people e.g*. 
the Daniels of Cayor), and tf it is basically correct in the ease of 
those like Sonni-Ali (1464) whose conversion was mcreb •' 


POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IN IV LAC K AFRICA 67 
formality, it proves inadequate in the case of such prophet- 
kings as the Tuculors of Senegal: El Hadj Omar, Hamadu- 
Hamadu, etc., whose precursor was the one in Songhai his¬ 
tory who might be referred to as His Most Muslim Majesty 
Askia Mohammed, prince of believers. 1 le carried out a coup 
d’etat by seizing the throne after having defeated the son of 
Sonni-Ali {Abu baker-Hau—March v, 149))' He instituted the 
dynasty of the Askias, a term of unclear etymology. He main¬ 
tained friendly relations with the Muslim clergy and the 
scholars of Timbuktu; contrary to Sonni-Ali, he governed by 
using them, asking their advice on all important decisions. By 
protecting the believers, he won their praise. He can almost be 
compared to King Clovis, protected by the Roman church.26 
He made a celebrated pilgrimage to Mecca, accompanied by 
1,500 men (500 calvary and 1,000 foot soldiers). He took 
with him part of the treasure of Sonni-Ali, 300,000 gold 
pieces which had been stored with the preacher Atnar. Upon 
his arrival, he gave 100,000 as alms to the cities of Mecca and 
Medina and purchased in Medina a mansion which was to 
serve as a hostel for pilgrims from the Sudan. T his mansion 
must have been large, for the cost of maintenance came to 
100,000 gold pieces. Africa thus opened its doors to interna¬ 
tional life by way of its Muslim kings. 
In the Holy Land the Askia met the fourteenth Abasside 
caliph of Egypt (April 1479-Septembcr 1497) and asked him 
to appoint him as his representative in the Sudan. It was to a 
purely spiritual designation. 1 he caliph accepted, asking the 
Askia for three days to give up his power, mentally speaking, 
and come back to see him. This was done and the Askia was 
Solemnly proclaimed by the caliph his spiritual lieutenant in 
the Black countries. He received for this a cap and turban 
which made him the delegate of Islam. Was this a way ot 
regaining live moral authority the African Kings had been 
losing since their Islamization? Or was it a profoundly reli¬ 
gious act? Whichever, the Askia on his return undertook the 


68 
PRIiCO LON 1 A I BLACK AFRI CA 
first important holy war waged by a Black sovereign. 1 he 
enemy was the Mossi emperor Nasere (August 1497—August 
1498), The Askia fulfilled all the religious requirements to give 
his enterprise a sacred character,2 
Askia Mohammed was the monarch whose attitude coin¬ 
cided with completion of the Islami/ation of the Songhai 
monarchy Before him, a king such as Sonni-Ali had tried to 
resist; he had, beyond any doubt, attempted to dam the Mus¬ 
lim flood which, in Ids eyes, was growing too serious, ! iis 
harshness toward the clergy of Timbuktu, his manner of prac¬ 
ticing Islam, to which he was theoretically converted, must be 
considered gestures of self-defense, Seen from this perspective, 
his conduct seems very consistent, rather than reflecting a 
“blood-thirst)1' temperament. The terms in which the larikh 
es Sudan judges the two monarchs are significant, 1'he author, 
a fervent Muslim, said of Askia Mohammed: 
Thus did God deliver the Muslims from their anguish; he 
used the new prince to bring to an end their misfortunes and 
restlessness. Askia Mohammed displayed, indeed, the greatest 
zeal for strengthening the Muslim community and improving 
the lot of its members,2” 
On the other hand, he drew' a very unfavorable portrait of 
Sonni-Ali: 
As tor this tyrannical master, tins infamous villain . . , he 
was a man endowed with great force and powerful energy. I vih 
licentious, unjust, oppressive, Mood-thirsty, he caused so many 
men to perish that God alone knows then number, lie pen 
scented the scholars and the pious by threatening their lives, 
their honor, or their reputations.2 
Sonni-Ali had no lack of excuses. The reason he gave for 
the massacre of certain scholars of Timbuktu was that they 
were “friends of the Tuaregs, their courtiers, and that lie was 
therefore against them."-'" 
Thus, as lias been mentioned, lus conversion was very 


POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IN BLACK AFRICA 69 
relative* if we arc to believe the Tarikh es Sudan, which 
considered him a monarch who made light of religion. He was 
in the habit of postponing until evening or the following day 
his five obligator)' prayers; when he did decide to say them* he 
merely sat down, made several gestures while naming the 
different prayers, then said to them as it they were people: 
“Now divide all that among you, since you know one another 
so well.”31 
The struggle for political power against Islam by the 
native clergy seeking to discredit it colored a whole period of 
African history. It was characterized in Senegal by the exodus 
of the marabouts from the city of Koki in the region of Luga 
Linguere (between Dakar and Saint Louis) toward the penin¬ 
sula of Cape Verde. This event took place during the reign of 
the Darnel Amari N'Gone Ndella (1791—1810). I he con¬ 
tempt between the secular arid the religious powers was re¬ 
ciprocal. The marabouts* especially those who were not part 
of the court, who were not responsible for the mystical defense 
of the dynasty through the establishment of the grigris and in 
other ways, made no mystery of their disdain tor everything 
mortal here on earth. The non-lslamized king was just an¬ 
other 4<Kaffir," an infidel to them. And since they were often of 
noble blood, and thus imbued with the same pride as the rest 
of the artistocraey, they often preached civil disobedience, 
exactly the way Saint Paul preached against the cult of the 
emperor. This was why the marabouts of Koki were per¬ 
secuted and forced to go and ally themselves with the 1 ebons 
of Dakar, It is interesting to analyze the kind of authority they 
would set up on the Cape Verde peninsula after the success of 
their revolution. 
The Lebou "Republic9* 
It would not be outside the framework of our main 
topic—the meaning of royalty—for us to examine the nature 


70 
PREGOLON1A-J BLACK AFRICA 
of this new power which has been inaccurately dubbed a 
“republic/" To do this, it is indispensable that we trace the 
genesis of events and return to the village of Koki-Diop. 
We cannot be certain of the origins of the Diop dan, for, 
in the present state of research, it is difficult to trace their 
migration across Africa by relying on totemic names, for 
example. There is no doubt, however, that some Diops were to 
be found in Nubia (eh map of migrations). Were they fish¬ 
ermen on the Senegal River? Ibiuboh means fisherman in 
Tuculor and Pen I, And that was the occupation of the Diops in 
Put a-Toro, Considering the idea that Africans like to have of 
their birth, such a modest origin would cause indignation 
among the Diops of Cayor who considered the I hops of the 
river as only an isolated nucleus, reduced to dependency on 
the Tuculor majority. That being as it may, they arrived in this 
area already Island zed and founded all the villages in Senegal 
called Koki: Koki-Diop, their homeland near lAlga, Koki- 
Kad, Koki-Dakhar, Koki-C.ouy (the second terms of the Iasi 
three names designate the species of trees that grew around 
each village). We shall later see that there are many indications 
of a link between Koki and Kukia, the latter word referring to 
an historic city on the Niger downstream from Gao. In that 
case, we would have to look toward the East for the origin of 
the Diops, of whom a few at most would have made a stopover 
in Futa. In any case, the Diops of Koki were part of the 
Doniisokhnas (Muslim clergy ot noble or distinguished 
origin). 
The first chief of the Lebou state, Dial Diop, was the son 
of one of the marabouts who had emigrated from Koki. He 
was appointed, after the victory, despite his foreign origin, 
because he was the one who dared to head the resistance; 
organize it within the walls of the peninsula, and stand up to 
the Cayorian Darnel whose maneuvers and state of mind lie 
very well knew and, unlike the Lebou, was not intimidated by 
That makes clear a capital fact, that must he definitely stressed 


POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IN BLACK AFRICA 
?L 
in order to clarify the political history ot the peninsula. 
Through a now-habitual confusion, the reigning Diop family 
has become analogized to the general population and thought 
of as being Lebous. But we have shown that the Diops origi¬ 
nated in Kokh The Lebous are a group midway between 
Wo lots and Sercrs. They are closer to the latter, whose ethnic 
names they share: Diagne, lave, Ngom, They have the same 
tradition and practice the same libations. They are of the same 
ethnic type. The homogeneity of totemie names within an 
infrequently crossbred human group in Africa allows Lebous 
and Sercrs, as well as Wolofs, to be certain that Diop is not a 
typical Serer-Lehou name. 
Having clarified this point of history, let us go on to the 
analysis of the form of power established. It was not a re¬ 
publican power, as all the manuals state, It would indeed be 
hard to imagine a republic in which power passed from father 
to son within a single family from its origin to the present day: 
Dial Diop, 1795-1815, Matar Diop, his son, 1815—1830. 
Following a dispute over an extradition he refused to agree to, 
the French intervened and after lengthy negotiations managed 
to have him replaced by his cousin Elimanc Diop, t 830—1852; 
Mo mar Diop, son of Matar Diop, was his successor, 1852- 
1855; Deinha Fall Diop, a descendant of Dial Diop, then 
acceded to the throne, 1855-1861; the French definitively 
occupied the peninsula during his reign. From then on, they 
kept a close eye on the succession to the throne, always trying 
to have it occupied by die Diop most favorable to them, 
tilings continued in this manner until the time of the Scringe HI 
Hadj Ibrahima Diop, chief of the Lebous early in this century. 
When the marabouts arrived from Koki, the majority of 
the Lebous were nondslamized, as are present-day Serers, Not 
Until the beginning of the twentieth century was there mass 
conversion of the populations of the interior, brought about 
by Ahmadu Bam ha and Id Had) Malik Sy; So, it was the 
Diops who 1 si ami zed the Lebous and instituted their govern- 


71 
PRECOLON IA I, BLACK AFRICA 
ment, a theocratic monarchy identical in every way to that 
founded on the Senegal River by the luculors in 1776. It is 
characterized by the existence of a dynasty, as in all monar¬ 
chies; it is theocratic and Muslim, in that its only code of laws 
is the Koran. One must not forget that, after Islamization, the 
cadis of the empires of Ghana, Mali, and Songhai dispensed 
justice in strict accordance with the laws of the Koran; the 
Dakar regime, thus, was no more republican than the govern¬ 
ments of those empires. The “king'’ had the same character as 
the sultans of the Arab Orient; he once again succeeded in 
uniting within himself the temporal and the religious. 
MONARCHIC AND TRIBAL AFRICA 
Africans thus never experienced a lay republic, even 
though the regimes were almost everywhere democratic, with 
a balance of powers, i hat is why every African is at heart a 
hidden aristocrat, just as every French bourgeois was before 
the Revolution. The deeper reflexes of the present-day African 
are more closely tied to a monarchic regime than to a re¬ 
publican one. Rich or poor, peasant or urbanite, all dream of 
being a small or great lord rather than a small or great 
bourgeois. The quality of their gestures and attitudes, their 
manner of seeing things, whatever their caste, is lordly and 
aristocratic in contrast to bourgeois “pettiness." There is still 
one revolution’s distance between African and Western con¬ 
sciences, in terms of instinctive behavior. These aftereffects of 
aristocratism would have been extirpated only if the African, 
in the course of his history, had become responsible for his 
own destiny within the framework of a republican regime. 
Western colonization, even when republican, could not 
change these facts. That also explains why many Blacks adjust 
perfectly to the manners of the British aristocracy. It is hard to 
trace to this factor a certain aesthetic approach of the Black, 


POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IN It I. AC K AFRICA 
73 
although it does seem to he an important trait of the African 
character. 
This judgment, contrary to what one might think, is 
applicable to all of black Africa, to different degrees. In the 
precolonial period the entire continent was indeed covered by 
monarchies and empires. No spot where man lived, even in 
the virgin forest, escaped monarchic authority.12 But we must 
recognize that not all peoples living under the same political 
regime had the same cultural level. Some outlying populations 
still lived in a scarcely shaken or liberalized clanic organiza¬ 
tion, whereas the large numbers in the cities were detribalized. 
A striking example of this is the empires of Ghana, Mali, and 
Songhai. One can indeed contrast, on the basis of the remain¬ 
ing documents (Al llakri or Khaldun), the teeming cits' life of 
Timbuktu, Gao, Ghana, Djenne, or Mali, which contained 
only isolated individuals, with the collective life that still held 
sway in the outlying elans of the goldbearing regions to the 
southwest, located on the Upper Senegal, and even farther 
south, where dctribalization was scarcely even beginning. Ac¬ 
cording to Idrisi, 
Blacks who went about totally naked, goi married without 
dowries, and were prolific goat- and camelherds with tattooed 
faces, lived to the West of Mali. The other, more highly de¬ 
veloped inhabitants of Ghana went slavebutuitig in this region, 
which must have covered part of Lower Guinea and the south¬ 
ern part of present-day Senegal.11 
These clans and tribes were in every way comparable to 
those who lived at the borders of the Roman Umpire at the 
time of its decline and fall, when the Romans were already 
completely detribalized. This was the politico-social con¬ 
dition at the time Africa encountered the West at the start of 
modern times (sixteenth century). 
What happened then? The Africans gradually lost their 
ability to decide their own fates. The local federating authority 
dissolved, or was at any rate diminished and rendered 
. 


74 
P RE COLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
powerless. Internal evolution was consequently thrown oft 
balance. In the cities where detribalization had already taken 
place, a return to the past was out of the question: individuals 
would continue to be united by social bonds. But where clanic 
organization still predominated, where social limits were still 
determined by the territory of the clan or tribe, there would be 
a sort of turning inward, an evolution in reverse, a retribaliza- 
tion reinforced by the new climate of insecurity. Collective life 
again took precedence over individual life. But, as can well be 
imagined, such clans were far from being as primitive as one 
might offhand have thought: They were not without the after¬ 
effects of the earlier imperial epoch. 1 hey were already de¬ 
veloped and complex. That is why ethnologists, to their 
immense surprise, but without exception, always discover in 
them traditions that do not correspond to this stage of social 
organization, but are more advanced; they often do not hesi¬ 
tate to attribute this to a phenomenon of degeneration, sup¬ 
posing that these populations, living today in so primitive a 
state, had in the past experienced some forgotten great period. 
We have tried here to demonstrate how they actually reached 
this point. 
At any rate, monarchic vestiges being less prominent 
within clanic life, we can proceed to these partial conclusions 
which have a measure of moral and social significance. We can 
certainly see that there was a monarchic Africa and a tribal 
Africa. If we tried to state the factors favoring evolution in one 
direction or another, we would have to recognize that African 
spiritualism, which we have already mentioned, and aristo- 
cratism within monarchic Africa were psychological and intel¬ 
lectual factors unfavorable to a socialistic evolution, But the 
African was an aristocratic collectivist: all of the foregoing 
underlines what separated his attitude from that of a pro¬ 
letarian collectivist, in the light of his politico-social life, his 
solidarity was a lordly one; despite that, he was not loath to 
share; the reflexes of accumulation of material wealth re- 


PO M TIC A L O K<; AN I / A II ON IN B I AC K AFRICA 
75 
maincd very slight m him. Consequently, his materialistic 
habits rather favored a socialistic evolution. 
Tribal Africa had the same characteristics, with this ex¬ 
ception, that the aristocratic, monarchic factor was almost 
totally absent; clanic collectivism was proletarian. Justice was 
also more immanent within the clan: the repressive political 
apparatus had become less crushing, without however reach¬ 
ing the same degree of withering away as in the tribes and 
clans conceived by Kngcls. 
Such data bespeak an original type of development. 
OR 1C IN OF THi; CONSTITUTIONAL RFC)ML 
111 analyzing the significance of royalty, we reviewed the 
cases of traditional kings, islamizcd kings, and emigrant non- 
Islamized kings. We also analyzed the content of the constitu¬ 
tions. The time has come to suggest what may have brought 
these about. Many facts would lead us to feel that at the 
beginning royal power, being sacrosanct, was absolute. I he 
generally accepted idea of African royalty does not allow for 
supposing that at the very start its authority might have been 
limited by some kind of constitutional system. On the other 
hand, it is not conceivable that this authority might have been 
exercised in an abusive manner, considering ns religious 
character. Hut within the royal court, design and spontaneity 
both playing a part, everyone began to serve within the frame¬ 
work of his own profession; a tradition was born, grew 
stronger, and finally took root with the ideas that the warrior 
nobility, linked to the development of the monarchy, had 
toward manual labor. I he latter was rather despised, as 
against the military calling. It would therefore not have been 
possible, at the start, tor a prince, within the framework of life 
at court, to be assigned work of a manual character: the 
equerry, the executioner, the head ostler, the guardian of the 


76 
P RE C O L O N I A L B L AC K AFR l C A 
treasury* and so on, could not be noblemen. For the nobles, 
when not fighting, indulged their idleness or played at sports, 
games of skill and courage, hunting, or yote (a local chess 
game involving strategy). These first professionals, by caste, 
were the forerunners of the future government ministers, 
whose functions, considering the emoluments involved, 
quickly became hereditary By this natural mechanism, it 
worked out as it each caste, from the start, had been called 
upon to designate its own representative at court. No such 
thing. The system was not born out of idealism. Only a 
deceptive appearance can lead to such conceptions: it grew 
out of the local reality' based upon the caste system, the 
division of labor. 
But, as time went by, the council so constituted was to 
take on importance, by the very dialectic of social rela¬ 
tionships. No text, no tradition forced the king to take its 
advice: he did it first voluntarily in order to rule more wisely; 
then, he was forced more and more to do so, hv the effect of 
an internal social necessity. The freemen, in particular, the 
grandees of the kingdom, represented by the Prime Minister, 
soon made their weight felt, discreetly but effectively limiting 
the power of the king. In reality, this limitation everywhere 
extended only to the stopping of abuses. The Prime Minister 
was the one who could initiate the procedure which, in Cayor 
for instance, would lead to the deposing of the king, if the 
latter disagreed with him, that is, with the people; if, in fact, 
he ceased to rule wisely. 
This way of conceiving the genesis of monarchal consti¬ 
tutions is confirmed by the tradition within the courts of 
African marabouts. Members of the masses, often on their 
own initiative, without having been specifically designated as 
at the courts of temporal leaders, carry out activities related to 
their professions. If this proves satisfactory, they are after 
awhile duly appointed, confirmed in their positions, without 
this, however, assuming any hereditary family character. That 


POLITICAL ORGAN! ZATl ON IN HI.AGK AFRICA 
77 
is how it happened with Amadu Bamba, the founder of 
Muridism in Senegal, with his brother Cheikh Anta, with 
Cheikh Ibrahima Fall, during the past fifty years. The identity 
of appearances of the lives of temporal and spiritual leaders 
was not without its drawbacks for the latter. The French 
government often thought that hidden behind the religious 
facade were temporal ambitions for power. As a result, Amadu 
Bamba was deported to Ciabon for seven years and Cheikh 
Anta to the Sudan, i<> Segu, from where he returned only in 
1935, after intervention of the deputy Galandou Diouf. 
Fustcl de Coulanges is quite correct in warning historical 
researchers against the error of imagining the past in terms of 
the present. But all the earlier developments relating to the 
stability of African societies, show that the danger of intellec¬ 
tual adventures is negligible in this case. 
CROWNING Ol Till. KING AND COURT LIFE 
To the extent that African history, up to now, has been 
confined to a monotonous succession of dates and events, 
drily related, it has seemed important to us to try to picture 
the I ocal color of the past, with maximum intensity, reiving 
nevertheless very closely on available documentation. 
Songhai 
in the present state of research, we know practically 
nothing of the enthronement rites of the Mcigha of Ghana. On 
the other hand, we can trace the details of this ritual for 
Songhai. I he Askia had a throne in the form of a dais, 
perhaps inspired by those of the Orient; however that may be, 
there is no doubt of its existence. When the Askia Mussa’s 
brothers formed a coalition to fight and kill him, they all 
quickly returned to seize the throne. I he Chaa-Htrma Alou 


78 PRECOl.ONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
found the Kormina-Fari already on the throne: a shorl bloody 
fight ensued, resulting in the death of Ainu and the accession 
of the Kormina-Fari, who was none other than Mohammed- 
Benkan.14 Fie thus owed his accession to the vigilant support 
of his brother Otsman-Tinfiran. 
During the coronation ceremony, a whole group of peo¬ 
ple, all equally wearing the burnous, surrounded the king 
right into the throne room, in solemn procession: " they were 
the souma, among whom Amar, when pursued by Benkan’s 
sons, had hidden away in disguise, dressing like them in a 
burnous.,f> The enthronement was followed by the swearing of 
oaths. Generals, soldiers, all the people, even the clergy, had 
to swear on the Koran an oath of faithfulness and obedience 
to the new Askia. It even seems that this ceremony was more 
important than the actual enthronement, because it obli¬ 
gatorily took place for each new reign, whereas it was not rare 
for the Askia to be invested with power in some small outlying 
city' where in all likelihood there was no throne at all. The king 
had to be present at the Friday prayer, which was said in his 
name. There are some indications that this oath was not purely 
a matter of form, and that the masses of people, to the extent 
that they were fervent believers, truly felt themselves bound b\ 
it. 37 
Indeed, the Askia Ismael believed that the hemorrhage 
which struck him on his accession was due to the fact that he 
had not respected the oath of faithfulness he had sworn on the 
Koran to his brother, Askia Benkan. The royal audiences in 
Songhai were strictly regulated; every high dignitary had a set 
place in the Assembly, corresponding to his official role: each 
also had its distinctive uniform and insignia. Following the 
death of the Dendi-Fari Sinbalo, Askia Daud gave that title to 
the Kni Kamkoli, but he had him take the insignia off his 
uniform and allowed him to wear only the official headdress 
during receptions. We must deduce from this that his appoint¬ 
ment was not permanent. During an audience shortly there- 


POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IN BLACK AFRICA 
79 
after, the Askia claimed to have consulted the Almighty in 
order to find out whom he should name to lead the people of 
Dendi, and appointed Ah Dudo, who had presumably re¬ 
ceived the divine approval, In the Assembly then sitting before 
the king, Kamkoli was in the place of the Dendi-I’ari; he 
politely, but firmly and with dignity, took note of the hypoc¬ 
risy of Askia Daud, then left the l ari’s place to take that of the 
KoT, Of course, the king had even more insignia and emblems 
which were duly removed from him it he was deposed by a 
coup d'etat, which is what happened to Askia Ishaq. *H Askia 
Mohammed received from the Abbcside Caliph Malay Abbas 
a turban, a green skullcap, and a saber to wear around the 
neck. Since he inaugurated the reign of the Askias, these 
objects were thereafter added to the royal insignia, which 
already included a royal drum, twelve standards, and the 
aforementioned tin-tatiri, which made the Askia master of the 
earth.,v 
The emperor of Ghana, in addition to his crown which 
was more like a diadem, had several banners and a single flag, 
according to Idrisi.4" 
f he Fari’s uniform must have included a double-tailed 
tunic and a turban. After the death of lari Abdallah, tins was 
the outfit, apparently corresponding to his functions, that 
Askia Mussa gave to his brother Ishaq; the Farma, at least of 
certain regions, was entitled to a drum. When in 1524 the 
Adiki-Farma Bella, Askia Mohammed’s nephew, was named 
Binka- Farma, lie became entitled to a drum, of which all his 
other brothers were envious. I he larikh es Sudan notes that 
the position thus held in the governmental hierarchy was a 
very high one. When his brothers threatened to smash his 
drum the day he came to Kagho, Bella had a very African 
reaction of defiance.41 
1 he ceremonial of court life was very strict and seems, 
Rive or take a tew variants, to have been the same throughout 
Black Africa. On approaching the king, one had to cover one’s 


8o 
PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
head with dust, as a sign of humility. The chief, in Africa, is by 
definition the one who must not raise his voice: his rank and 
dignity require him to speak very softly, whether he be a 
spiritual or a temporal leader. Thus, the Mansa of Mali, like 
the Askia, and present-day marabouts, ail had their heralds 
who audibly transmitted to the assembly the words of the 
chief. The herald in Songhai was called the Wan a do. Listening 
to the orders of the king, even when he was not present, one 
had to remain standing, provided one had recognized his 
authority.42 This was how Otsmane had to act toward Askia 
Mussa, when he finally temporarily recognized his authority, 
after having been lectured by his mother.43 Obviously, one 
also bared one’s head in the presence of the king. In tradi¬ 
tional African monarchies, the king alone wore a headdress in 
early times, as was the case with the Pharaoh of Egypt; even 
the heir apparent of Ghana, the emperor’s nephew, wore 
nothing on his head in his presence. 
Askia IJenkan (Bunkan) was the one who embellished life 
at the court of Songhai: 
The prince maintained the royalty in the most remarkable 
way; be heightened it, embellished it, and adorned his court 
with more numerous courtiers than before, dressed in more 
sumptuous outfits. He increased the number of orchestras and 
singers of both sexes and lavished more favors and gifts. During 
his reign prosperity spread throughout his empire and an era of 
wealth began to be established.44 
According to Kati, Bunkan had cloth clothes made for 
himself, decked his servants with bracelets of precious metals, 
and went accompanied by drummers in canoes. He intro¬ 
duced the trumpet {fotorifo) and the deep-toned drum 
tancia). Before him, these two instruments had been the 
exclusive possession of the King of Air. Silk bedding was 
customarily used.4' 
As can be seen from the following, the luxury of Songhai 
went into real decline, as compared to Ghana and Mali. I his 


POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IN BLACK AFRICA 
8 i 
would explain the disappointment of Djuder and l.eo Af- 
ricanus on their arrival at Kaoga. 
I he court music was polyphonic, like the music of the 
griots and the murids of today. On the other hand, there was 
the main singer (debekat in Wolof) and the choir (avukat), 
which might vary in composition. At the courts of temporal 
chiefs, the singers were of different sexes, but at those of the 
marabouts, they could be only male. 
In 1706, before the time of the Askias, the insignia of the 
king of Kaoga, according 10 A1 Bakri, were made up of a seal, 
a sword, and a Koran, all of which were said to have been sent 
by the Umayyad sovereign of Spain: the dynasty having al¬ 
ready become Islamized, the king was always a Muslim. Ka¬ 
oga at the time was made up of two cities, the king's and a 
Muslim quarter. The king was then called the Kanda, which is 
reminiscent of Nubia. 
The people dressed in a loincloth and a jacket of skin or 
Other material, the quality of which depended on the individ¬ 
ual’s means.46 They had not yet become Islamized and fol¬ 
lowed the traditional beliefs. While the king took his meals, a 
drum was beaten, all urban activity stopped, and Black danc¬ 
ing women in wigs portrayed dance scenes around him. At the 
end of the meal, its remains were thrown into the river: a 
different drumbeat informed the city, which resumed its ac- 
tivity, and the courtiers who were present shouted and ex¬ 
claimed with joy. Such was the local color of life at court in the 
period of the Kandas, according to Al Bakri.47 
Cayor 
I he enthronement of the Darnel of Cayor, except for the 
secret religious side of it, was rather rudimentary. The people 
foregathered, making a huge pile of sand (in this flat country) 
atop which the king went to be enthroned, comparably in this 
to a Frankish king being raised on a shield. It was his elevation 


PREC O LON I A 1. B LAC K APR I C A 
Hz 
above the others, his exalted rank, that was thus made tangible 
by the building of a throne of sand. His distinctive insigne was 
a circular grigri on the left ankle: miomho’g tank; originally; 
it would seem to have been a ring: lam 'u tank* Whence, 
lamatty the heir, the landed owner, in Serer, and lam torn, the 
heir to the Toro in Tuculor* Under Darnel Mei^a Tenda of 
Cayor, whose reign was a happy one, the temporary capital of 
“Maka" was lighted by jars of fat in which dipped a narrow 
strip of material to serve as a wick* They were placed at every 
street corner, 
Ghana 
In Ghana, the luxury evident at court, as the documents 
allow us to reconstitute it in detail, was equaled only by that 
of the Aegean period. The emperor, his heir apparent, the 
notables all literally dripped with gold* The pages, horses, 
and dogs of the Tunkara were equally covered with it. People 
were literally living in gold, as is shown by an A1 Bakri passage 
about the audiences of the king who was called both Tunkara 
and Kaya-Magan. According to him, only the king and his 
sister's son, that is, the nephew who is heir apparent, were 
allowed to wear tailored clothes. All others following the same 
religion as the Tunkara—he., the tradition—wore loincloths 
of cotton, silk, or brocade, according to their means. I he men 
were clean shaven and the women shaved their heads. The 
king's headpiece was made up of several gold caps wrapped in 
very delicate cotton materials. When he held an audience for 
the people, to hear their grievances and remedy them, he sat 
on a throne inside a pavilion around which stood ten horses 
caparisoned in gold materials. Behind him, stood ten pages 
carrying shields and swords mounted in gold; the sons of the 
princes of his empire stood to his right, dressed in magnificent 
clothes, their braided hair intertwined with gold threads. 1 he 
governor of the city sat on the ground before the king and, all 


POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IN R LAC K AFRICA S3 
about, were the viziers, that is, his ministers, in the same- 
position. i lie door of the pavilion was guarded by dogs of 
excellent breed who almost never left the king’s side: they 
wore gold and silver collars, from which dangled bells of the 
same metals. The sound of a drum (deba) made of a hollow 
piece of wood announced the opening of the session. The 
people came running, clapping hands, poured dust over their 
heads, and presented their grievances. 
Through the description of one of the emperor’s au¬ 
diences, we get an idea of how both the Tunkara and his 
retinue were dressed, the insignia they wore, how the pages 
were armed, the women coiffed, and so on. Alongside these 
audiences, or royal sessions of justice, which were common to 
Ghana, Mossi, Mali, and Songhai, there were no less general 
horseback rides through the capital. The Tunkara, like the 
Mono Naha, rode on horseback, followed by his entire court, 
through the various neighborhoods of the city, also to hear Ins 
subjects’ grievances and remedy them. 
Thar, by and large, was the court ceremonial of Ghana, 
as the documents allow us to reconstitute it. 
We must add that the emperor, according to Al Bakri, 
lived in a stone castle, surrounded by a wall.48 Idrisi is even 
more precise: according to him, the emperor lived in a for¬ 
tified chateau, built in is 16, decorated with sculptures and 
paintings, and boasting glass windows. Understandably, De- 
lafosse was reluctant to accept that text too literally,4* 
Idrisi wrote in i 150; be was one of the best Arab geogra¬ 
phers of bis time. In Sicily, he drew up the first navigational 
charts that were to be used in modern times. Nevertheless, it is 
customary to point out that in bis “Description of Spain and 
Africa" be relates facts about this continent on which he was 
not as well informed as Al Bakri. However that may be, it is 
hard to believe that so scrupulous and thoughtful a geogra¬ 
pher would invent out of whole cloth such precise details in 
describing the chateau. 


84 PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
Mali 
Ibn Battuta who visited Mali in 1351—1353, under 
Mansa Soleiman, left testimony which allows ns to recreate 
the local color of the royal audiences. On audience days, the 
emperor sat in an alcove that had a door leading into the 
palace: it had three windows made of wood covered in silver 
foil, and below three others decked with gold plate or vermeil 
(which leads us to conclude that the palace had at least two 
stories). These windows had curtains: a handkerchief with 
Egyptian designs, attached to a silken cord, was slipped 
through the grillwork that protected them on audience days. 
The people were summoned by horns and drums. 1 hree hun¬ 
dred soldiers carrying hows and javelins lined up in double 
columns on either side of the window in which the emperor 
was to be. Those with the javelins were on the outside and 
standing, while those with the bows sat in front of them, the 
four columns facing each other. Two saddled, bridled horses 
and two rams were brought in: a custom reminiscent of 
Ghana. Nearly three hundred subjects went looking for Can- 
dja Mussa, The ferraris, the emirs, the preacher (kbatib), and 
the jurists arrived and took seats, to the right and left in from 
of the soldiers, in the space between their columns. Dugha, 
the herald, stood at the door, wearing zerdkhamw clothes: on 
his head a fringed turban, typical of the country; he alone had 
the privilege of wearing boots 011 this day; lie had a sword in a 
gold scabbard on his side; and lie wore spurs, two gold and 
silver javelins with iron tips. Soldiers, bureaucrats, pages, 
Messufites, and all others, remained outside, in a wide tree- 
lined street. Each of the ferraris was preceded by his subordi¬ 
nates carrying blades, bows, drums, and horns made of ele¬ 
phants’ tusks. One of the musical instruments was the 
halafon, which was made of reeds and gourds and was played 
with drumsticks. Each ferrari had a quiver of arrows at his 
back and a how in his hand; he was mounted, and his subor- 


V oil TIC A L O K G A N IZ AT 1 O N IN BLACK AFRICA 
• - --— 85 
dinates, both foot and horse, stood in front of him. When the 
emperor arrived behind the window, Dugha served as 
mouthpiece, transmuting the orders, recovering the grievances 
and submitting them to the sovereign, who gave his decisions. 
Sometimes the audience was held inside the palace court¬ 
yard. 1 hen a si Ik-covered scat mounted on three tiers was 
placed under a tree; this throne was called betr-bi. A cushion 
was placed on it and the whole thing covered by a dome- 
shaped silken patasol, with a golden bird at the top, as large 
as a hawk. I he Manga came out of the palace with a bow in 
his hand, a quiver on his back. He wore a turban of gold cloth 
bound by golden ribbons ending in metal tips more than a 
palm in length, looking like daggers. He wore a red coat, of 
European material: the montenfes. Singers walked before him, 
holding in their hands gold anil silver vessels; lie walked 
forward slowly, followed closely by three hundred armed sol¬ 
diers, and stopped from time to time. Before taking his place 
on his seat, he would make a slow turn around; then flic 
horns, the trumpets, and the drums sounded as soon as lie 
was seated. Once again the two horses and the ram were 
brought to drive away had luck, Dugha was at his habitual 
place near the Manga; the rest of the people were on the 
outside; the feiraris were called in and the session began in the 
usual conditions, as in Ghana.'’0 
When in October 1559 Askia Daud defeated the Manga 
of Mali, at the battle of Dibikarala, he married his daughter 
Nara; she then lived in a luxury comparable to that of Helen 
of Troy. 
She was coieicd with jewels, surrounded by numerous 
slaves, both male and female, and abundantly supplied with 
huniuuc and baggage. All of her household utensils were made 
of gold: dishes, jars, mortars, pestles, and so on.’1 
Obviously, an illustration of African history is possible: 
there are more documents than generally stated. They allow us 


86 
PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
to reconstitute, sometimes even in detail, over a period of 
almost two thousand years, African political and social life. 
We know how the members of the different classes in Ghana, 
Mali, Mossi, Songhai, and Cayor were dressed; what they did 
with their spare time, their daily routines, and so on. Wc 
know what social relationships governed society, and thus the 
behavior of an entire society which we can vividly bring back 
to life before our eyes, even on the stage or in films. The local 
color would be authentic. 
I his description of the different aspects of African life 
will he fleshed out in succeeding chapters by the addition of 
facts no less abundant or detailed, concerning the admin¬ 
istrative, juridical, and military administration, as well as the 
intellectual life, and so on. In the course of these develop¬ 
ments, we will be able better to sec the convergences and 
divergences between them and the European societies contem¬ 
poraneous with the period under consideration. 
N O T E S 
i. In Ethiopia, all the pretenders to the throne were locked up in a fortress, 
to await the decision announced by the Prime Minister after delibera¬ 
tion (Baumann). 
i. lattsicr, Li tides Soudammes: Le Notr du Yatanga (Paris: Ed. Emile 
Larose, 1917), Bk. VII, pp. 119-160. 
3. I he testimony of Cada Mosto confirms this (1455). 
4. Al Bakri, Description de i’Afrujtie septcntrionaU' (traits. Shine) (Al¬ 
giers: typographic Adolphe Jottrdan, 1913), pp, 117-310: ■•Descrip¬ 
tion de Ghana et moeurs de ses habitants.” 
s. lbn Khaldun, op, eft., p. no. 
6, Al Bakri, op. rit*f pp. 32.7-328, 
7. Ck Diop, L'Unite culiurelle de VAftique noire, esp, ch, ill. 
8. lbn Khaldun, op. cit., p. r 1 r. 
9, lbn Battuta, op. cit., pp. 13—15. 
10, Sadi, larikb es-Soudan (tram* O. Houdas) (Paris: Kd4 Krnest LcrouN. 
tyoo), ch. XVIII, p. j 84. (Reprinted by A, Maisonneuve, 1981.) 
n. Idem., p* jH5. 


POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IN BLACK AFRICA 
11. Mahmm'td Kati, l.inkh cl-Vettach (Trans. O. Houdas and M, De- 
lafosscj lHaris: Ed. !l. Leroux, cli, XIV, j>. 174. (Reprinted by 
A. Maisontteuve, 1981.) 
13. Phis term must he understood to mean women of the slave class who 
were legally married in religion and in law, after the first wife, who was 
generally a forewoman. They were called tara in Woloi 
M- Sadi, Lirikh es-Soudmt (hereinafter referred to as I ,.S.), pp, 14^ 1 48; 
15. Idem** pi 167 
16, Ci. Katt, larikh el-l-ettdch (hereinafter referred tons Z.F.), XIV, \\ 174. 
17. eh, I, pp. 1 1-44. 
18, Ci 7 J\, p. 55. 
j 9» Andre I f10]-1 auirhau and jean Poirier, de 1'Uttton ftan- 
VoL 1* “Afrique** Paris: Presses Universitaires tie Prance, 193 0, 
P* 3^9- 
20. Wester m a tin and Baumann, I.es Peuples et les (liwlisations de VAftique 
(trans. L Horn burger) (Paris; Ed. Payot, 1947), p. \iH, 
iu Sadi, 7.A., ch. XVIII, pp. 187-188. 
22, Idem, elii. XXXIII, p. *59. 
23* Ibkh ch. XXVII, p. 199, 
24, Ci t\ ch. Ill, ppi 71 -?2, 
15. 7IF., ch* IV, pp. 75-77, 
26. Merovingian king of the Iranis {481 s i 1 ), who converted to (dhris- 
tianity in 496 a.d, (Tr, Note). 
27* Sadi, J,S*, ch. XIII, pp. 117—122. 
iR. Idem., eh. XIII, p, 1 j 8. 
29* Hrw,, ch. XII, pi 103. 
30. I bid., p. 107. 
,31 - Ibid., p. 11 o, 
32. Cf, Robert Vigondys map of Africa, 1795, 
Idrissi geograpbe (trans, Amedee faubert) (Paris; Royal Primshop, 
I, p* 19- 
H- Sadi, T.S.P ch* XIV, p. 144. 
VT During ordinary' sessions, the Askia sat on a kind of platform or divan 
which could accommodate several people* Only a Sherd was allowed to 
sit beside him, 
36* Sadi, 7.N,, ch. XVIII, p. 188. 
37- ldem,t p, 185* 
3idem., ch. XXII, p. m. 
39- Kati, T./-,, ch. XIV, p. 17^ 
40, Idrtssigeo^raphe, op. at,, p. 17. 
4 1* Sadi, /.V, ch, XIII, p, 131, and ch. XIV, p. 142* 
■*21 rab°Ut s tod a) a re greeted as t h c ki ngs were greeted, how eve r w it hout 
covering oneself in dusts 


88 
PRECOLG N I A I BLACK AF R1CA 
43- 
44* 
4 5* 
46. 
47. 
4S* 
T.S., p. 135- 
Ibtd.t ch* XIV, p. 1 n- 
CL Kan, 7J .( chs. Vlll-IX, pp, 3 58, j; 66. Sunni Ah had several resi¬ 
dences (Madugti) at Kaoga, Kabarra, Djemith Kau saw the remaining 
walls of the last of these. 
And later a loincloth of “windi," held up by a belt and a silver bracelet 
on the right wrist, according to Kali, /.K, p, j 89. 
AI Bakri, op.. dt.t "Route de Ghana a TademekkaC pp. 34 a-34 3. 
Idem., “Description de Ghana et nioeurs de ses habitants," pp. \z - 
3.30, 
49. Del^fosse, Haut-Senegal-Niger (Paiist Ld. [ arose, 1911), VoL I, p. i>* 
50. Ibn Battuta, op, cit, pp. 13-76, 
51. Sadi, l\S.t ch- XVII, p. i7o. 


Chapter Five 
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION 
POWER OP THE AFRICAN EMPIRES 
Before undertaking a detailed analysis of the political 
organization of prccolonial Africa, we must show the actual 
power and the extent of the African empires. These factors arc 
Often minimized, or left vague. Insofar as there exists a certain 
persistent tendency to allude to more or less mythical White 
conquerors to explain African civilizations, it is worthwhile to 
reestablish the truth strictly based on facts and documents, 
with regard to the relationship between White and Black 
cultures toward the close of the First Millennium—when Af¬ 
rica’s history was beginning just about everywhere,1 
Delafosse, quoting Ibn Khaldun, relates that, as early as 
the eighth century, after the conquest of North Africa by the 
Umayyads, Arab traders crossed the Sahara as far as the 
Sudan. 
STRENGTH AND EXTENT OF THE EMPIRES 
Ghana 
Henceforth new connections, never again interrupted, 
were being forged with the outside, particularly the Arab 
Orient and the Mediterranean world. These first traders dis¬ 
covered that the Sudan was governed by a Black emperor 
whose capital was Ghana. 'The empire at its highest point 
89 


90 
PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
extended from Djaka on the west of the Niger River to the 
Atlantic Ocean and, north to south, from the Sahara to the 
edge of Mali. The gold-rich region of Upper Senegal, centered 
around Gadiaru, Garentel, and Iresni, belonged to the Em¬ 
pire. In Bakri’s day the outlying village of Aluken was an 
Eastern border territory governed by tbe son of the late Em¬ 
peror Bessi, uncle of the reigning Tunka Min. 
The white populations then inhabiting the land were 
under the strict authority of the Blacks. In 990 the Berber 
center of the Lemtunas, Aoudaghast, was governed by a Black 
farba who levied taxes, tariff duties, etc., in the name of the 
Emperor on the goods and merchandise of the cits'’s popula¬ 
tion, made up almost exclusively of Berbers and Arabs; these 
two groups moreover hated each other at the time. 
Immediately following the occupation ot North Africa, 
the first Umayyads sent an army to attempt the conquest of 
the Empire of Ghana. It was defeated, but its survivors were 
not executed: they were allowed to settle on the land and live 
there in the same conditions as others. They were known as 
the El Honneihm, a portion of whom broke away and settled 
in the village of Silla, on the Senegal River, where the ruler 
was already Islamized. In 1067, during Bakri’s time, the El 
Honneihm minority had practically been assimilated into the 
Black society whose religion it shared. I hose who had settled 
along the river were called El Taman.- Can there possibly be 
an etymological link between that name and Lcitnan, Lam- 
Toro; heir of the Toro? Is that, perhaps, the White origin often 
claimed by the Euculors and, in particular, the ruling dynasty' 
of the Lam-Toros? However that may be, it was through peace¬ 
ful intermarriage that this white minority must have fused 
with the Black element. 
Not until the decline of Ghana did it cease to rule 
Aoudaghast, after the attacks of the Almoravides in 1076. 
While the Berbers remained vassals of the Black emperor ot 
Ghana for centuries, the Almoravide revenge on Ghana lasted 
only ten years; it ended in 1087 with the death of Abubeker* 


POLITICAL ORGANIZATION 
91 
Ben-Omar, killed by the arrow of a Black warrior inside the 
borders of present-day Mauritania. The Almoravides dis¬ 
played extreme cruelty at the time of the taking of Ghana: 
goods were looted, the inhabitants slaughtered. After this ten- 
year interruption, Ghana was once again to be attacked by the 
Sosso vassals but succeeded in bolding its own until the siege 
of the capital by Sundiata Keita in 1240. 
The Empire of Ghana, according to Bakri, was defended 
by two hundred thousand warriors, forty thousand of them 
archers. Its power and reputation, renowned as far as Baghdad 
in the East, were no mere legend: it was actually a phenom¬ 
enon attested to by the fact that for 1250 years a succession of 
Black emperors occupied the throne of a country as vast as all 
of Europe, with no enemy from without nor any internal 
tensions able to dismember it. 
rhe capital was already a cosmopolitan and international 
city; it had its own Arab quarter where Islam existed 
alongside the traditional cult, before the conversion of the 
royal dynasty and the people: in Bakri’s time the city already 
boasted a dozen mosques located in the Arab sector, with 
their imam, muezzins, and salaried “lectors.”3 It had a large 
number of jurists and scholars. Ten thousand meals, cooked 
over a thousand bundles of wood, were served daily, fhe 
Emperor himself attended these feasts to which he treated the 
populace outside his palace. 
The Empire lirst opened itself to the world-at-large 
through commerce; it already enjoyed international repute, 
which would be inherited and extended by the future empires 
of Mali and Songhai. But domestic slavery at this time was rife 
in African society': one could sell bis fellow man to another 
citizen or a foreigner. Which explains why Berber and Arab 
merchants, grown rich since settling at Aoudaghast, though 
still vassals of the Black soveriegn, could acquire Black slaves 
cm the open market. Some individuals in the city owned as 
many as a thousand slaves. 
I his shows the peaceful means by which the white world 


92. 
PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
could possess Black slaves.4 It was not through conquest, as 
has often been asserted. These empires, defended when neces¬ 
sary by hundreds of thousands of warriors, and having their 
centralized political and administrative organization, were 
much too powerful for a single traveler, thousands of miles 
from home, to try any sort of violence against them. The 
reality of the matter was much simpler, as evidenced by the 
preceding; for reasons to he explained later on, slavery would 
cease to exist in the white world, especially Europe, while still 
subsisting in the Black. One sees here the complex facts that it 
has often been very tempting to use so as to obscure certain 
points of history. All the white minorities living in Africa 
might own Black slaves, but slaves and white masters alike 
were all subjects of a Black Emperor; they were all under the 
same African political power. No historian worth his salt can 
permit the obscuring of this politico-social context, so that 
only the one fact of Black slavery emerges from it. 
Mali 
The boundaries of the Empire of Mali stretched from 
Kaoga (Gao) all the way to the Atlantic and from the Sahara 
to the tropical forest. According to Ibn Khaldun, the Emperor 
of Mali reigned over the entire Sahara: . . Mansa Mussa 
was a powerful sovereign whose authority extended as far as 
the desert near Uargla.”5 
In Bakri's view, Ifrikya (North Africa) was bounded by a 
line parallel to the Equator, passing through Sijjjlmcssa,6 and 
had the same universalist tendency, the same cosmopolitan 
character as Ghana. The capital city, Mali, also had its own 
Arab quarter, its mosques and jurists, its Muslim cemetery, 
etc. The Emperor, Mansa Kankan Mussa, made a celebrated 
pilgrimage to Mecca (1314-132s). He exchanged embassies 
with Morocco, maintaining commercial and diplomatic ties 
with Egypt, Portugal, and Bonin. 


1*0 LIT! CAL O KG AN J Z ATI ON 
93 
There were African interpreters in Egypt. Ibii Khaldun, 
speaking of the frontiers of Mali which extended as far as the 
Atlantic Ocean, mentions the name of El Hajj Yunos, a 
Tekrurian interpreter in Cairo.7 
Africans were already in the habit of traveling to North 
Africa, and sometimes settling there to study. Mali’s interna¬ 
tional activity thus increased. Delafosse was quite right to be 
impressed by the might of this nation. 
Meanwhile, Gao had recovered its independence between 
ihe death of Gongo (Kankan) Mnssa and the accession of 
Suleiman Mansa, and approximately one century later, the 
Man dingo Empire began to decline under the attacks of Song- 
hai, while preserving enough power and prestige so that its 
sovereign could meet on an equal tooting with the King of 
Portugal, then at the height of his glory.8 
I he might of tlie Empire was such that the Arabs at times 
called on it lot military aid. Such was the case, according to 
Khaldun, of El Mamet, who fought the Arabo-Berber tribes 
from the region of Uargla, in the North Sahara. He appealed 
to Kankan Mussa, on the tatter’s return from Mecca, to conic 
to his aid militarily. Khaldun also tells of the size of the 
Moroccan embassy in Mali and the interest the Sultan of 
Morocco displayed in it. 
The Mughreban sultan even had prepared a selection of the 
finest products of liis realm and entrusted to Ali Ibn-Ghanem, 
Emir of the Makil, the task of transporting this truly royal gift 
to the sultan of the Blacks. A deputation made up of the 
highest-ranking individuals in the empire accompanied Ibn- 
Ghanem.9 
Contrary to the notions prevailing today, the relationship 
then existing between Whites and Blacks could not have been 
1 ose of masters to slaves. A passage from Ibn Battuta, who 
visited that very Empire of Mali, clearly reveals the state of 
nnnd and the pride of Africans of this period (1352.). The 
border regions of the Empire, such as Ualata, at the edge of the 


94 
PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
Sahara, were governed by Black farbas who levied customs 
duties and other taxes on caravans bringing merchandise into 
the country. Upon arrival, the merchants had to clear admin¬ 
istrative formalities with them, before being allowed to carry 
on their trade. It was in such circumstances that Ibn Battuta, 
accompanying one of these caravans, met the farba of Ualata, 
Hussein, 
Our merchants stood up in his presence and, even though 
they were close to him, lie spoke to them through a third 
person. This was a mark of the little consideration he had for 
them and I was so unhappy at this that 1 regretted bitterly 
having come to a country whose inhabitants display such bad 
manners and give evidence of such contempt for white men.10 
Ibn Battuta was an eyewitness; it is difficult to contradict 
him regarding the feelings and attitudes he attributes to the 
speaker. But, if the pride and dignity of the farba arc beyond 
question, the contemptuous intentions attributed to him by 
Battuta seem to derive from the latter’s ignorance of the 
proper ceremonials governing receptions and audiences of any 
African chieftain. As we have already seen in chapter IV, the 
latter addresses a crowd only through a herald; this was bow 
the farba must have acted at his own court in Ualata. 
The white minorities who lived in the Empire at the time 
of Ghana were now, in even greater numbers, under the rule of 
Mali: the Ullimidden, located on the bend of the Niger, the 
Medeza, near Ras*el-Ma, and all the Berber tribes living in 
Mauritania, as evidenced by tins passage from Mohammed 
Hamidullah, in an article entitled “Africa Discovered America 
before Christopher Columbus,” based on a contemporary 
. i1 
lb an Fadallah al-Uni any (d, i 348) has left us an account of 
an attempt to reach America from West Africa. Of his volu¬ 
minous encyclopedia, Masatik ababsad, only a minute frag¬ 
ment has so far been published. What follows is an excerpt from 
the fourth volume of this work (MS. Asasafia, Istanbul, fob 
r 8b, 19a, 19b, 13b): 


L’O LITIC A1, O RG A N1 Z AT I ON 
95 
Chapter Ten, concerning Mali and its dependencies . . . 
"In these regions there is no one deserving the name of kitip,, 
unless it be the sovereign of Ghanah, who is a kind of viceroy of 
the Emperor of Mali, although in his own domain he is like a 
veritable king. To the north of Mali, there are white Berbers 
who live as his subjects. These are the Yamasar, Yantafras, 
Maddusah, and l.anminah tribes. I hey have their own cheikhs, 
who rule them, except for the Yantasar who have their own 
kings, vassals of the Emperor of Mali.” 
In actuality, when far from their homeland, the Arabs 
were often led by their isolation to adapt to the Black African 
milieu. Some of them thus traditionally took on the role of 
jesters at royal African courts. Though never before empha¬ 
sized, this aspect of the relations between the two cultures was 
no less ancient or general. Khaldun thus relates the story of 
two Arab courtiers, Abu-lshac el Toneijen-EI-Mamer, who 
were part of Mansa Mussa’s entourage on Ins return from 
Mecca. 
We were part of the royal cortege and even outranked the 
viziers and heads of the state. Mis Majesty listened with plea¬ 
sure to the talcs we told him and, at each stopping-place, he 
rewarded us with several kinds of foods and sweets.12 
1 his tradition extended even to the smaller courts of 
Cayor, where it is very much alive. It explains the existence in 
this area of Moors who have expediently adopted totemic 
names of reigning African princes. Many of the white citizens 
of Mauritania are named ball and Diagne, because the Darnel 
of Cayor had always to be a ball, while the Diagncs were the 
landed Serer proprietors of the earlier era. Khaldun stresses 
the coveted position which b.s Sakli must have had at the court 
of Mali, in addition to the remuneration he received for build¬ 
ing the “mosque" of Kaoga (Gao) for Mansa Mussa. 
Songhai 
The Songhai Empire extended from east of the Niger 
River as far as the Atlantic Ocean and “from the frontiers of 


y 6 
P RE CO I, ON IA L B LACK AFRICA 
the land of Bindoko as far as Teghezza and its dependen¬ 
cies'’14 under Askia Mohammed, the strength of the army 
hastily raised to fight Djuder was 12,500 cavalry and 30,000 
Songhai inherited the international renown of Mali. from 
Kankan Mussa to Askia Mohammed, the memory of the 
voyages of African princes is recorded in the annals of the 
East, where the astonishment expressed at the power of the 
African empires is indescribable. 
In their annals the peoples of the Orient told of the voyage 
of the Prince; they noted their amazement at the power of his 
Empire, but they did not depict Kankan Mussa as an open- 
handed, magnanimous individual, for, in fact, despite the e.\- 
tent of his holdings, he gave as alms in the two holy cities only a 
sum of twenty thousand pieces of gold, whereas Askia-F,M fajj- 
Moltainmed bestowed upon them one hundred thousand pieces 
of gold.14 
Sonni Ali, 14 known also as All Ber or Ali the Great, drove 
out the Tuaregs who had held I imbuktu after the Mandingos, 
from 1454 to 1468, l ire Tuareg chief, Akil, fled to Biro 
(Ualata) without a fight at sight of Sonni Ali; he took with 
him all the jurists and members of the clergy who were in 
favor of Tuareg rule. The Tuaregs had committed the worst 
excesses during the thirty-four years of their domination. In 
actuality they had never permanently settled in the city; the 
earlier administration had remained: the city continued to be 
governed by a Timbuktu-Koi who collected taxes in their 
name. Only after a series of humiliations, pillages, and mas¬ 
sacres did the Timbuktu-Koi call for help from Sonni Ali to 
free the dry. Sonni Ali entered it on January 30, 1468, The 
Tuaregs had been content to remain nomads, making periodic 
forays into I imbuktu; their dominion had never extended to 
the right bank of the river, according to Sadi. I he Tuaregs 
then became not mercenaries but vassals of the Askias of 
Kaoga, until the fall of the Empire. Sonni Ali conquered Bara, 


POLITICAL ORGANIZATION 
97 
the Senhajja-Nu Berber country governed at the time by 
Queen Bikuri-Kabi. I le seized all the mountain regions where 
the Berbers were camped, as well as KuntalandJ6 The con¬ 
quered Berbers were assimilated and integrated into the Black 
organization; the Askia made their 
who owed specified periodic tribute. 
1'hus, the Maghcharen-Koi and the Andassen-Koi were each 
politico-administrative 
tribal chiefs into Kois 
Approximate area ol the empires of western Africa. 


98 
PRECOLO'NIAL BLACK AFRICA 
obliged to provide i 2,000 soldiers in case of war. The Tuaregs 
were at that time far from seeing themselves as members of the 
same political community as the Arabs. It was with these 
forces, 24,000 Tuaregs, plus Iris other men, that Askia Daud 
campaigned against the Arabs of Bentanba in May 1571.17 
The loyalty of the vassals stood every test; even during the war 
against Morocco, the Andasscn-Koi' remained loyal to the 
Askia, until his death. When Askia [shat] I, who came to 
power in r539, one day received an invitation from Mulay 
Ahmed, King of Morocco, to cede to him the salt mines of 
leghezza, he replied: 
“The Ahmed who listened [to such advice] could not be 
the present Emperor of Morocco, and as for the Ishaq who 
would heed him, lie is not 1; that Ishaq has yet to he born." 
I hen he sent two thousand mounted Tuaregs instructing them 
to sack the whole end of the region of the Ora’a toward Mar¬ 
rakesh, to kill no one, and then to retrace their steps. 
1 he order was scrupulously carried out; the market of 
the Beni-Asbih was pillaged, as well as all the wealth of the 
l)raa region. The Askia thus demonstrated bis power to the 
Sultan, who did not react in any way. 
This invitation already implicitly raised the question of 
the frontiers of Black Africa, at least on a political level. All of 
the foregoing allows 11s to show that, for more than a thou¬ 
sand years, Black governors administered the border regions 
of Teghezza on the Tropic of Cancer, Ualata, and Aoudaghast. 
I lie belt of the desert situated between the Tropic and a line 
passing through the Draa and Sijilmcsa, was always a no 
man’s land belonging equally to the two countries; it never 
was subject to precise political authority from one side or the 
other. An unadministered zone, it was dangerous to cross 
because of the Messufa Berbers, some of whom did not hesi¬ 
tate to attack caravans unwilling to pay them to serve as 
guides. One of the last Teghezza-Mondzos, in the service of 
the Askia, died there in 1557: he was called Mohammed 


POLITICAL ORGANIZATION 99 
Ikoma.19 I he universal character and cosmopolitan spirit 
abroad in this empire are nowhere so well displayed as in the 
prayer attributed to Konboro, King of Djenne, at the time of 
his conversion to Islam; he prayed, among other things: 
(1) that he who, driven from his own land by indigence 
and penury, might come to this city, should in exchange dis¬ 
cover here, by the grace of God, wealth and abundance such as 
to make him forget his old homeland; and (2) that the city be 
peopled by a number of foreigners greater than that of its 
citizens.20 
Aryan Europe during antiquity experienced the self-cen¬ 
tered patriotism of the city-state; it experienced universality in 
the Church of the Middle Ages; it later ended with na¬ 
tionalism and the formation of modern national states. Black 
Africa was to remain at the level of that universal con¬ 
sciousness politically and sociologically speaking, until its 
encounter with the West. Then, having undergone the effects 
of a conquering, expansionist nationalism, it would attempt 
to retaliate with the same weapons; thus African nationalism 
would never sink to basic chauvinism: it would consist, at 
most, in a development of cultural, ethical, and material 
values which give strength to peoples and assure their survival 
in the present world, a liberation of the will to transformation 
latent in the common consciousness. 
ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION 
The Empire of Ghana antedated by five hundred years 
that of Charlemagne, who was crowned Emperior in the year 
Soo. From the dismemberment of the Roman Empire in the 
fourth century until that date, Europe was nothing hut chaos, 
with no organization comparable to that of the African em¬ 
pire. With Charlemagne commenced the first effort at cen¬ 
tralization; but one can say without exaggeration that 
throughout the Middle Ages Europe never found a form of 


TOO 
PRE.CO LON IA I. BLACK AFRICA 
political organization superior to that of the African states. 
There is agreement on the fact that the African variety of 
organization is indigenous: it could not have come from the 
Aryan or Semitic Mediterranean, If one absolutely had to 
relate it to some earlier forms, the administrative centraliza¬ 
tion of Pharaonic Egypt, with its names, might be brought up. 
Each provincial governor in Black Africa was an image of the 
king, with his own small court. All the necessary elements 
were apparently present to give rise to feudalism. So we can 
ask ourselves why, up to their disappearance on contact with 
the West, the African empires did not evolve into a political 
feudalism through the progressive emancipation of these 
provincial governors. Yet, among the Mossi, once a governor 
was appointed, holding rank of minister, the King who had so 
designated him according to tradition could not dismiss him. 
We can cite four explanations for this cohesion which was so 
remarkable, if we except the periodic secessions of certain 
outlying provinces; but, in these latter cases, it is less a matter 
of a province becoming detached through the revolt of its 
governor than of a former small state, recently annexed, but 
not yet sufficiently assimilated into the Empire, finding 
enough character to dissociate itself at the slightest weakness 
of the central organization. This was the case with the Sene- 
gafesc states vis-a-vis Ghana: Djoloff, El Fcruin, Silla, and 
even Djara. 
(A) One of the explanations is of a religious nature. It 
seems beyond doubt that, in traditional monarchies, such as 
the Mossi and the Uadai in eastern Chad, the constitution was 
lived up to by all the people. I hose in charge had a religious 
notion of their functions, which prevented them from taking 
advantage of internal weaknesses in the political organization. 
We have seen that, among the Mossi, there was only one case 
ol internal political struggle, and this came very late. 
(B) In the Islamized empires, such as Songhai, tradition 
gave way to a strict administrative control that left very little 


POLITICAL ORGAN 12 A l ION 
IOI 
opportunity for feudal tendencies or possibility for seces¬ 
sionist maneuvers. Everything came from the Askia anti every¬ 
thing ended with him, [ lie larikh es Sudan relates that Askia 
Mohammed subdued all peoples "as far as leghezza, by fire 
and sword/’ and that lie "was docilely obeyed in the various 
states as in his own palace."21 
The provincial governors were mere civil servants, dis¬ 
miss;! hlc at any moment, m Songhai; but they might remain in 
office for more than ten years, ni fact for life, as long as they 
did not visibly nurture ambitions above their stations, and 
their administration was properly conducted. 
(Q During the Middle Ages there evolved in European 
history a situation that has no parallel in Africa: the barbarian 
invasions, Ot course, since prehistoric times, every continent 
lias been invaded by peoples of other races; but, during re¬ 
corded history, we know of no invasions ot Black Africa that 
compare in suddenness and intensity with those experienced 
by Europe in the tenth century. I he new European society, 
born ot the fusion of Gallo—Romans with the barbarians who 
invaded in the fourth century, was already established. It had 
already developed its first political structures, its first tentative 
administrative centralization in Charlemagnes day. After his 
death, Europe was eventually divided into three separate king¬ 
doms, ruled by his grandsons. It was then invaded anew by 
the Norse in the tenth century; As Andre Kibard lias shown, 
the insecurity which was then prevalent in the rural areas 
impelled the peasants to organize around a strung protector, a 
lord, whose authority over those under his protection grew 
daily more meaningful, whereas that of the King, living in 
virtual isolation at Ins capital, was more and more symbolic* li 
was thus, under the threat of external danger against which 
protection at any cost was necessary, that European feudalism 
was born and grew concomitant with the seizure and occupa¬ 
tion of the land by the lords. 
Much has been made of Arab invasions of Africa: they 


102. 
1*RECO LON 1A L BLACK AFRICA 
occurred in the North, but in black Africa they are figments of 
the imagination. While the Arabs did conquer North Africa 
by force of arms, they quite peaceably entered Black Africa: 
the desert always served as a protective shield, from the time of 
the initial Umayyad setbacks in the eighth century, no Arab 
army ever crossed the Sahara in an attempt to conquer Africa, 
except for the Moroccan War of the sixteenth century. During 
the period of our study, from the third to the seventeenth 
centuries, not one conquest was ever launched by way ot the 
Nile: that of the Sudan, accomplished with the help of En¬ 
gland, came only in the nineteenth century. Nor was there ever 
any Arab conquest of Mozambique or any other East African 
territory. The Arabs in these areas, who became great religious 
leaders, arrived as everywhere else individually and settled in 
peacefully; they owe their influence and later acceptance to 
spiritual and religious virtues. The Arab conquests dear to 
sociologists are necessary to their theories but did not exist in 
reality. To tins day no reliable historical documents substanti¬ 
ate such theories. We will cover the question of the later 
Moroccan occupation of Timbuktu in chapter VII. And we 
will see that the limited character of this phenomenon could 
not cause the outbreak of general panic such as took place in 
Europe, which would have been necessary for the birth of 
African feudalism. According to I bn Khaldun, it was rather 
from Africa, from Ethiopia and Nubia, that an expedition tc 
conquer Yemen took off: 
Beside them |the DcnidemJ, are the Abyssinians, the most 
powerful of Black nations; they live on the west coast of the 
I'M Sea, in the neighborhood of Yemen, It was from their lam) 
that the expedition was launched which, at the time of Du 
Nuas, crossed the sea to seize Yemen,22 
This is most likely an allusion to the Ethiopian expedi¬ 
tion which took place around the time of the birth of Moham¬ 
med, which is mentioned in the verse of the Koran entitled 
“The Elephant Leader.” 
(D) Whereas during the Middle Ages the entire feudal 


PC) LITIc:A L ORG AN l ZATION 
TO3 
system was to lie based on possession of the land through 
progressive despoiling of the protected inhabitants—creating 
the landed nobility—neither king nor lord in Black Africa ever 
truly felt he possessed the land. Land possession there never 
polarized the consciousness of political power. We have seen 
the religious factors that opposed this. The king and the little 
local lord knew that they owned slaves and that they ruled the 
entire country, the extent of which they knew perfectly well, 
and whose inhabitants paid them a specified tax. Yet they 
never fell that they owned the land, ( lie African peasant’s 
situation was therefore diametrically opposed to that of the 
serf bound to the soil and belonging, along with the land he 
cultivated, to a lord and inaster. I he conditions under which 
the very first “masters of the soil,” such as the Serer Lamans, 
ceded plots of land were in no way comparable to those in 
force during feudal times: they could never result in the loss of 
liberty for a non-slave. Under the worst of them, they called 
for an annual rental guaranteed by verbal agreement, can¬ 
cellable at the end of each season. Even the poor worker, the 
navetane, who possessed only the strength of his own arms, 
could not be reduced to slavery. In the morning he worked for 
the Laman, and in the afternoon for himself, on the same plot 
granted to him. 
1 he acute feeling of private ownership that we come 
across today among the Lebou of Cape Verde is a recent 
phenomenon connected with the development and exploita¬ 
tion of Dakar since the governorship of Pinct-Laprade (i 857). 
It was he who effected the first subdivision of land and issued 
authorizations for construction. I he economic development 
of the port of Dakar very quickly gave a special value to all the 
land on the peninsula, so that the Lebou landowners, who 
until then had been little concerned about it, now came to 
appreciate the increased value of their lands. 
These arc the four causes which seem to explain the 
absence of a landowning feudal system in the history of Black 
Africa. 


104 
PRECOLONIAL li LAC K AFRICA 
RESOURCES OP THE ROYALTY AND NOBILITY 
Taxes 
What, then, did this non-landowning nobility live on? 
What, in particular, were the material resources and the fi¬ 
nances of the king? We have seen that the institution of a tax, 
first conceived of as a tithe, a ritual deduction on the wealth of 
all subjects, was present in all these empires. As everywhere 
else, it was at first collected as payment in kind, then later, in 
Songhai and Mali, in gold currency. 
The litigation which opposed the Timbuktu-Koi to the 
Tuareg chief, Akil, which resulted in the intervention of Ali 
Ik-r, arose from the apportionment of the collected taxes. It 
had been the custom for one-third of the taxes to go to the 
KoT, but Akil refused to give him a single goldpiccc out of the 
three thousand mitkals he collected.21 It appears that Askia 
Ishaq I practically crushed Timbuktu’s merchants with taxes. 
A former singer, Mahmud-Yaza, was his collection agent. 
Seventy thousand goldpicces were recovered after the death of 
Ishaq.24 1’hese two facts prove the ubiquity of both taxation 
and the use of gold coinage in Songhai. 
Customs 
The second important source of revenue for the king was 
made up of customs duties. A strict customs system was 
established as early as the Ghanaian period; it was retained by 
the emperors of Mali and Songhai; duty was collected both on 
imports and on exports. According to Bakri, the Tunkara of 
Ghana took a fee of one gold dinar for every salt-laden mule 
entering his country, and two gold dinars for every load of salt 
exported. For a load of copper the rate was five mitkals, and 
ten for a load of miscellaneous goods.2> 


I*OL1TI CA L ORG A N I ZAT[ ON 
1 05 
Gold Mines 
The principal source of revenue for the sovereigns of 
Black Africa, from antiquity to modern times, from the Indian 
Ocean to the Atlantic, i.e., from the Nubia of Herodotus and 
Diodorus Siculus to the Ghana of Bakri and the Mali of Ibn 
Battuta and Khaldun and the Songhai of Sadi and Kati, was 
gold extracted from mines. According to an anecdote supplied 
us by Herodotus, the abundance of gold in Nubia was such 
that even the prisoners' chains were forged of this metal. Of 
course, this sort of tale cannot be taken literally ; nevertheless, 
it symbolizes an economic reality, a society in which gold 
seemed more prevalent than all other metals. The established 
facts conform well enough to this legend: the etymology' of 
Nubia is said to signify “gold.” Historically, Nubia was the 
country from which Egypt acquired all her gold. 
Ghana’s gold wras accumulated, according to Bakri, in the 
fortified city of Ghiaru, eighteen days distant from the capital 
on the Upper Senegal. The abundance of this metal was such 
that the king left to the people all the gold dust they could 
extract from the empire's mines. The king, however, kept for 
himself all pieces of native gold found; without this precau¬ 
tion, reasons Bakri,26 gold would have become so plentiful as 
to have virtually no more value in the land. Thus, instead of 
the total product of all the empire’s mines, the Tunka kept for 
himself only that share of the metal that was found formed 
into chunks. One such chunk, according to Khaldun, weighed 
fifteen pounds; it had been inherited by and belonged to the 
Mama of Mali: it was sold to some Egyptian merchants by 
Mansa Djata, the grandson ot Mansa Mussa, who exhausted 
the Royal Treasury.27 
Mali tints inherited the Ghanaian mines situated in Bam- 
buk, the same mines which were known to the Carthaginians 
and were explored by the Romans after the destruction of 


ro6 PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
Carthage by Scipio Africanus Minor (Bambuk = the Roman 
Bambutum).28 
The region of Gao to the east of the Niger also produced 
a vast quantity of gold dust and Bakri believes that it was 
actually the first country to produce this material. 
This gold, which was always abundant during the history 
of the African states, was the currency essential to interna¬ 
tional trade, first with the Arab Orient, then with Mediterra¬ 
nean Europe (Portugal, Spain). It contributed powerfully to 
the economic prosperity of the country; it quite certainly 
meant the sovereigns did not have to overwhelm their respec¬ 
tive peoples with raxes and tariffs. In order to grasp the 
distinction between the economic conditions, the monetary 
situations of the lower classes in Medieval Europe and Black 
Africa, we would have to imagine the king and the feudal 
lords, in 1067, allowing the serfs and the peasants the right to 
accumulate wealth equivalent to that of this African gold dust 
from the natural resources of their own countries. It is, there¬ 
fore, most important to bear in mind this economic factor 111 
explaining the peculiar aspect of Africa’s sociopolitical evolu¬ 
tion. 
R oyal treasury 
The treasury of the sovereign thus contained both gold 
pieces and chunks of gold in the raw state. There were lofts 
containing taxes in kind such as grains and storerooms for 
manufactured products: saddles, swords, harnesses, fabrics, 
etc. A fair share of the treasury of Sonni Ali was deposited with 
the cadi of Timbuktu, perhaps because the cadis, due to their 
positions, were traditionally honest men: this treasure did 
indeed exist, for it was where Askia Mohammed, after his 
coup and his accession, found the money for his pilgrimage to 
Mecca. 


P O LI TIC A L ORGAN IZ ATI O H 
107 
Booty 
Foreign expeditions also were profitable. Whether to se¬ 
cure existing borders or to increase the size of their countries, 
the sovereigns undertook military expeditions, outside the 
territories inhabited by their own subjects, whom they had to 
protect. There was a favorable occasion whenever two con¬ 
tiguous states were not allies: the borders were then vigilantly 
guarded and sometimes a defensive reflex might spark a con¬ 
flict. The properties of the losers would then be appropriated. 
Thus, in March 1513, El Hajj Askia Mohammed led an 
expedition into Kashcna; in February 1514 he began a cam¬ 
paign against El-Odala, the sultan of Agadez, which ended 
February t 5, 1515, However, as he gave no share of the booty 
to his vassals, one of them, Kotal, the Liki chief, also called 
Konta, revolted against him: a battle ensued at the end of 
which the Askia’s troops were not able decisively to defeat 
Konta’s. 1 he latter thus freed himself from the Askia’s au¬ 
thority. That situation was to last until the end of Songhai. An 
unsuccessful attempt at reconquest went on from February 5, 
1516 to January 24, T517.30 
Fhree facts should be noted. Contrary to what is some¬ 
times suggested, these expeditions were by principle directed 
against foreign territories, for the reasons already given, not 
against the sovereign’s own subjects living within his realm. 
This major political error was only very rarely committed in 
desperation, by a few minor emigre kings. This was probably 
the case with some of the Daniels of Cayor, who were confined 
within a relatively small, poor country, beyond whose borders 
'ay powerful, hostile kingdoms that it would have been out of 
the question to attack. 
Booty thus acquired was indeed a source of revenue. 
Finally, Konta, the chief who won his freedom, was nei- 
t er a civil servant nor an army leader who might have 


P R E C O L O N I A L B L AC K A F RICA 
i oH 
mutinied, but the minor king of a foreign region which had 
been annexed and thus regained its independence. 
I he Askia was the center of the administrative system, all 
of whose workings were familiar to him.We have seen that he 
made the appointments to all offices, some of which might go 
to his son. He appointed the cadi, the generals, and so on. He 
sometimes asked a functionary promoted to a higher office to 
name his own successor. The Askia El Hadj (accession: Au¬ 
gust 7, 1582), after putting down a palace revolt, elevated the 
kala-cha Denkelko, who had remained faithful to him, to the 
office of hi-koi, in place of Bokar, who had betrayed him. lb 
the greatest satisfaction of the kala-cha, he then asked him to 
name his successor: the new hi-koi did not hesitate to choose 
his own son. 
Fees Connected with Assuming Administrative Offices 
Appointments to the various offices, in the traditional 
kingdoms, entailed the payment of a customary fee, not, 
however, necessarily to the king. Thus, among the Mossi, the 
“keeper of the sand" confirmed everyone in his respective 
office, including the king, by giving him, according to a 
religious ritual, a bit of sand from a hole specially prepared for 
this purpose: the appointee then had to reward him with 
something of value, varying with the importance of the office. 
Here once again we sec this aspect of the African social 
structure, this aspect of the caste system: material wealth often 
bypassed the chiefs and notables to pass into the hands of men 
of the castes, skilled workers. No comparison with the feudal 
system in which the lord kept everything. Later on, with the 
profanation of the royal office, its secularization, this fee would 
return to the king. I'hus, in Songhai, at the time of the conflict 
with Morocco, a Rmdoko upon appointment was required to 
turn over two thousand cows.'2 
J 


POLITICAL ORGANIZAi ION 
toy 
GOVERNMENT and administration 
Hostages 
All the sovereigns of the Sudan found it politically and 
administratively wise to exact of the children of their vassals a 
variable term of service in the palace. Some of these young 
princes remained there all their lives as a sort of pages, ob¬ 
viously treated according to their rank, while others returned 
to their respective provinces after a number of years spent as 
hostages. Sadi remarked that this custom lasted from the time 
of Mali until his own day, and was general throughout the 
Sudan 
I bus, Ali-Kolon, the future Somvi Ali, was (irsr hostage of 
the Mansa of Mali at the time his homeland, Songhai, was a 
vassal of Mali. It is known that, despite the precautions taken 
by his father’s suzerain, he had to make good his escape so as 
to found the true Kingdom of Kaoga, whose borders, before 
his accession, did not extend beyond the suburbs of that city7. 
The plan nurtured and executed by Sonni Ali proves, if proof 
were needed, that the measures taken by the Sudanese kings 
were not necessary. During this period of raising the sons of 
their vassals, they hoped to bring them to share tlicir own 
ideas, to get them to identify closely with the interests of the 
kingdom, so that they would no longer feel themselves strang¬ 
ers obligated to fight against them out of filial devotion. This 
was the farsighted pursuit of a policy of strengthening the 
bonds between the various provinces and the cradle of the 
realm, an effort at integration after the annexation of a 
province. In exactly the same way in an earlier period, the 
Egyptian Pharaohs acted toward the sons of Asiatic princes 
who were their vassals from the time of the Eighteenth Dy¬ 
nasty onward, after the conquest of Thutmosc ill. This pro¬ 
cess of assimilation was thus not the least of the factors in the 
African governmental and administrative methods. 


1X0 
PRF.CO I.ON1 A L B l.ACK AFRICA 
Songhai 
The generals in Songhai were not necessarily slaves; they 
could be men of any class; likewise, the civil servants. The 
career of hi Amin eloquently illustrates this fact. Under the 
Askia Mohammed he was only a simple hostler, a member of 
the royal cortege, one of those who, in turn, were called upon 
to saddle the king's horse. Askia Ismael promoted him to chief 
of pedestrians, or routemaster; he pursued these duties until 
Askia Daud came to power, when the latter made him a 
Djenne-Monzo or chief of the city of Djenne. Rising from the 
position of hostler to that of governor of one of the largest 
trading cities in the empire, can truly be called coming up in 
the world.14 
The previously established barriers within the caste sys¬ 
tem, by division of labor, had now partially given way; we get 
the impression that one could, therefore, aspire to any posi¬ 
tion made possible by luck, intrigue, and merit. It must be 
remembered that the founder of the Askia dynasty, called 
Mohammed the Great, the Believer Prince, was only a lieuten¬ 
ant of Sonni Ali who usurped the throne after defeating his 
son, Bekr Dan (March 3, 1493). One important notion would 
seem to have vanished: that of legitimacy.i5 Any victorious 
leader is legitimate, as the facts prove: the numerous coups 
d ctat throughout the history of Songhai. I he people imme¬ 
diately recognized his authority; they held no rancor toward 
hmi. A loyal branch was thus horn and developed from a verv 
lowly common stock; at the end of one generation it had 
acquired almost the same prestige as the other already-existing 
royal families. We thus witness the parallel development of 
several dynasties, rivals insofar as they are confined to certain 
relatively distinct families: a situation exactly identical to the 
one in Cayor in the seventeenth century, which may have been 
inherited from Songhai. I he existence of the Kharejjitc sect of 
Islam may not he unconnected to this state of affairs; this sect 
is characterized by its refusal to recognize any supreme au- 


L’O LiTl C A I, O RG AN [ Z ATI O N 
l l l 
thority for all Islam, any caliph, any sort of Muslim Pope, and 
by the fact that any believer, however modest his social origins, 
might be elevated to the rank of king if he otherwise possesses 
the requisite qualities. Sonni Ali nominally belonged to this 
sect.’6 
Various Ministries 
The hierarchy of offices in Songhai was inflexible. The 
country was divided into provinces, cantons, villages, large 
cities of commercial character such as Djenne and Timbuktu, 
border areas which were strongholds such as Tcghezza, 
Ualata, Nema, etc. A sultan or fart governed certain 
provinces, as might a chd: there was the Dendi-fari, the Kor- 
mma-fari, the Kala-cha. A farba, a mondzo, or a & of governed 
cities of different types and their immediate environs. There 
was the 1 imbuktu-koi, the Hi-koi, the Dirma-koi, the Horn- 
bori-koi, etc. The governor of the Ualata border area, with its 
dependencies, was a farba in the days of Mali: the equivalent 
term for farha in Songhai was fartna. The border area of 
Teghezza on the Tropic was governed by a mondzo. The 
balama was a kind of supply officer; the title itself was older 
than that of Askia, according to Kati. 
The assara-mundio was a kind of police commissioner: 
viz., the assara-mundio of the city of Djenne or the city of 
Timbuktu. 
The anfara-kuma was the traditional judge in pre-Islamic 
times. It was a hereditary office always held by members of the 
Kuma clan. I hey were anfaras, or judges, whence the term 
anfara-kuma which came to mean the cadi in Songhai. Kati 
insists on the point that this is the inevitable adaptation of die 
traditional expression for an equivalent Arabic term after 
Islamization. 
T be kan-fari or kormina-fari, was a new office created by 
Askia Mohammed and occupied for the first time by his own 
rather, Amar Komdiago, who was tondi-farma under Ali 


t T Z 
PRECOi.ONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
Bn ; ii corresponded to a veritable viceregency with Tendirma 
as ns capital. 
1 he tunkoi, kuran, and soira were subaltern military 
positions that might exist in a city such as Djenne. 
I he I)j£HHC-hoir bcuii-koi^ and Kora-hoi, were admin- 
istrative and military' chiefs of cities and regions; they thus had 
under their command a territorial guard. 
1 fie Guimi-koi, or (im>ici koi, was the port director. 
’I he Hi-kai was responsible for ships and smaller craft. 
I he Yobit-koi was in charge of the market. 
I he gari-tia repaired saddles. 
I he berbuchi-mundio, or mottdzo, was the administrator 
in charge of affairs concerning the Berabic Arabs. 
Ihe koira-banda mundio was a suburban administrator 
of a city. 
1 lie barei-koi was the chief of etiquette and protocol. 
I he uanei-fitrma was the minister of property. 
I lie sao-farma was the superintendent of forests. 
I he lari-farma was the superintendent ot waterways. 
1 lie katet-farma was in charge of affairs concerning the 
white minorities inhabiting the country. 
The tarn-farma was the cavalry chief. 
I he tari-mumiio was the inspector of agriculture. 
Certain offices could he held at the same time: one might 
he a fari-tnotidzo. The fan was above the koi) the Hi-kot; Ali 
Dudu, provisionally named dendi-fari, was obliged to go back 
to Ins old seat in the Assembly when lie lost this title {as we 
lia\e already seen). But the koi was above the chd- we have 
observed that naming a kata chd to the post of koi corre¬ 
sponded to a promotion. We will not repeat the description of 
official insignia and uniforms connected with these offices. 
1 he identify of the terms designating the administrative offices 
of Western Sudan would give evidence, if this were needed, of 
the earlier administrative unification of this region. 


POI I TIC AC ORGAN I 2ATI ON 
1 1 * 
Administrative Unity 
Delafosse pointed out that 
in many parts of the Sudan the following terms were and still 
are in use: lari, larima, Farhama, Kama (Maude), fa ran (Song* 
hai), Fara (Haussa), Far*Ha (Wolof), all ot which may derive 
from the root far, meaning summit, apex, chief, prince, from 
which also derives the title ot die Pharaohs.1 
In Wolof, in fact, there exists beside the term farba that oi fan, 
which is an imperial ephithet: bur meaning King; bnr-fari 
meaning the supreme king, the emperor, the one whose power 
and greatness cannot be surpassed. I he Egyptian term is not 
etymologically what Dalafosse suggests; it is formed from the 
plural of per: the wall of the house, and by extension the 
house ot the Pharaoh, The meaning of per in modern Wolof is 
identical to that of per in ancient Etvptian. In Wolof, words 
beginning with p form their plurals by alteration to f: Peal 
bi—the IViiI; leu! yi—the Penis; per mi—the wall; fer yi—the 
walls; whence fart. We recall that if Pharaoh was derived from 
the Egyptian plural of per, it was because the king was cus¬ 
tomarily identified with the name of his house, which was a 
double house. Would this then suggest that the creators of the 
first West African states recollected an earlier political organi¬ 
zation which, by way of Nubia, leads us back to Egypt? [lie 
ubiquity of this term in all African languages, the ety¬ 
mological explanations that can be offered, leave little room 
for doubt. If that were the case, a new light would be shed on 
this initial period of African history; it would no longer be a 
question of an absolute beginning, but rather of a con¬ 
tinuation following emigration; there would then be nothing 
surprising in these monarchies' being constitutional from the 
s*ai t: their originators, instead of being creators ex nihito, 
WQuld have had the benefit of an earlier political experience, 
Thus it would he equally comprehensible that the forms of 


PRECOLO N 1 A L B LACK AFRICA 
l l 4 
sociopolitical organization of the African states were related 
only to those of Pharaonic Egypt, and could finally be under¬ 
stood only in terms of them. 
No insurmountable objections are raised by supposing it 
would be materially impossible to govern an empire the size of 
Europe or administer it without a minimum of bureaucracy. It 
is difficult to realize that, for fifteen hundred years, the 
Timkas, Mansas, and Askias simply issued verbal orders and 
got verbal accounts and reports in return. I he customs ac¬ 
tivities of the border areas, based on what we have just said, 
would presuppose some kind of precise accounting, just as the 
payment of taxes and other fees would seem to imply the 
issuing of receipts, especially to the peripatetic merchants at 
the markets of Timbuktu, Djenne, etc. The same held true 
with regard to relations of all sorts between the central au¬ 
thority and the various provinces, to allow administrative 
coordination. We shall see, in chapter VII, that writing had 
already long been part of daily life and that intellectual ac¬ 
tivity had reached a level barely conjccturable today. Epistol¬ 
ary correspondence was common: when Askia Mussa came to 
power, he wrote two letters, one to his brother Orsman, the 
other to the latter’s mother, so as to avoid any eventual con¬ 
flict,38 The Askias who thus carried on private correspon¬ 
dence, did as much on the administrative and political levels. 
Sadi and Kati allow us to be sure of it. The concept of 
documentation and records clearly existed in the people’s 
consciousness: the author of the Tarikh as Sudan stresses that 
he saw the original of the document addressed by the Sultan 
of Morocco to Askia Ishaq II, concerning the salt mines of 
Teghezza.'9 It was customary to accompany these missives 
with some token of authenticity, if they did not bear an 
inimitable seal: thus, when the Timbuktu-Koi decided to 
open the gates of his city' to Sonni Ali, he made sure to send 
one of this boots with the messenger so that Sonni Ali might 
have proof positive of the authenticity and sincerity' of the 


POUTICAL ORGANIZATION 
' IS 
mission.40 The existence of African archives will he confirmed 
by further data when we discuss education and child-rearing. 
M! I.ITARY ORGAN I /.A l l ON 
In mentioning above the numbers of men in the armies of 
Ghana and Songhai, wc showed only the size of the imperial 
forces. I he time has come to analyze the structure of these 
armies, their components, their weapons, their strategy, and 
even their tactics. 
Structure 
In Mali and Songhai, we know for certain, the king who 
appointed the generals was himself the commander-in-chief of 
the army and personally directed military operations, as 
would later the Dorobe Darnels of Cayor. The lankb es Sudan 
points out that Askia El Had) was never able to undertake an 
during his entire reign, because at the time of his 
accession he contracted a disease that kept him from riding a 
horse. I le was an exception, in sharp contrast to all the other 
Askias.41 
In each kingdom, each nation, the army was divided into 
several corps assigned to the defense of different provinces, 
although under command of the civil authority. Thus, each 
provincial governor had at his disposal a part of this army to 
which he could assign tasks under the orders of a general 
whose powers were purely military. On the lower level, below 
the king, in political or administrative affairs, the distinction 
between civil and military powers was thus very clear. The 
king of Mali, when he conquered Songhai, Timbuktu, Zagha, 
Mima, the Baghena, and the environs of that region as far as 
the Atlantic Ocean, had two generals under his command. 
One was responsible for the defense of the southern part of the 


i 16 
PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
empire, on the Mossi border, the other of the northern part at 
the edge of the desert. Their respective names were Sankar- 
Zuma and Faran-Sura. These were tltc titles corresponding to 
their military functions. Each of them had under his com- 
* 
mand a certain number of officers and troops.42 The western 
borders of the state of Djcnne, before the conquest of the city 
by Sonni Ali, were defended by the commanders of twelve 
army corps deployed in the country of Sana: they were specifi¬ 
cally assigned to surveillance of the movements of Mali. I he 
Sana-faran was their general-in-chief. We even know the fam¬ 
ily names of some of the officers under his orders: Yausoro, 
Soasoro, Matigho, Karitmt, etc. Likewise, twelve commanders 
of army corps were assigned to the east of the Niger toward 
T'itili.43 
Among the Mossi, the Moro Naha whom tradition pro¬ 
hibited from leaving his capital, could not personally direct 
military expeditions: as a result, this became the task of the 
active generals. The Mossi conscripted everyone. When the 
danger had passed, each citizen returned to his home, It is 
village; the army was then demobilized, except for a few 
security units. 
In Songhai, beginning with the reign of Askia Moham¬ 
med, a distinction began being made between the people and 
the army. Instead of mass conscription, a permanent army was 
created; civilians who were not part of it could go about their 
business. During the reign of Sonni Ali, all able-bodied na¬ 
tionals were subject to enlistment.44 The major divisions of 
the army were: knights, cavalry, foot soldiers, auxiliary bodies 
of Tuaregs, elite infantry regiments, the royal guard, and an 
armed flotilla. 
Knights 
! he princes of black Africa who could afford to outfitted 
themselves in complete or partial armor like that of the 
knights of the Western Middle Ages. After the accession of 
J 


POLITI CAL ORGANIZATION 
( 17 
Askia El Hadj, the kormina-fari El Hadj, on February 13, 
1584, started a revolt with intent to seize power. But he failed: 
the Askia, who was well informed, made him take off the 
flowing bonbons he was wearing; beneath he wore a coat of 
mail.4S When balama Mohammed es-Sadek revolted against 
Askia Mohammed Bano and in March t>88 attempted to 
march on Kaoga, the Askia, who came forth to challenge him 
to battle, wore an iron breastplate.46 As it was extremely hot 
and the Askia was very fat, he died of the effects of his armor. 
The rebellious balama wore an iron helmet; when Omar- 
Kato threw a javelin at his head, it ricocheted off the helmet.47 
Another sultan of Morocco, M-u I ay Ahmed, in December 
15H9—January 1590, renewed the request made by one of his 
predecessors about the mines of Lite Teghezza. Ishaq 11, who 
was then Askia, reacted violently, and as a sign of defiance and 
a show ol force sent the sultan an offensive letter, some 
javelins, and two iron hoots.4S 
Complete knights armor was thus in use, as we have 
seen: coat of mail and iron breastplate, helmet, hoots, javelin 
. . . all of it. I he African princes of Songhai were armed as 
knights. This practice was certainly not as widespread as in 
Europe, if only because of the climate, as shown by the death 
of Askia Bano, who died of suffocation.49 The explorer Barth 
saw such knights in the kingdom of Bornu in more recent 
times, about 1850, It is likely that such armor came from 
Europe, as did certain fabrics; but no documents exist to 
prove it. It might have come into Africa from Spain. We may 
suppose that African blacksmiths made replicas from these 
models, better adapted to the climate, which could he worn 
cither inside or outside clothing. I he use of iron armor was 
common in Benin; the subjects appearing on the bronzes of 
fhe time as decoration were in the first instance real an mor. 
Cavalry 
All other mounted soldiers of more modest birth and 
rtUno formed the cavalry. I hey were armed with shields and 


PR ECOLON1AL BLACK AF R r C A 
11 8 
javelins. The cavalry was terrifyingly powerful, if we judge by 
the panic that the dashing of its weapons caused in the 
Moroccan ranks during the war against Morocco (June 
1609), 
What frightened the Moroccans most in tins encounter was 
the noise of the shields pounding aginst the legs of the horses 
when they were galloping. The entire Moroccan army; chiefs 
and soldiers, fled as far as Lake Debi, where the men were 
thigh-deep in water. But having recognized the cause of their 
terror, they left the water after having experienced the greatest 
terror and the most extreme fearhn 
Foot Soldiers 
Foot soldiers were armed mainly with bows and arrows. 
The infantry included a special elite corps, which was dis¬ 
tinguished by the wearing of gold bracelets* Whatever the 
fortunes of war, the members of this elite corps could not turn 
their hacks on the enemy: which is what happened at the end 
of the first battle that Djuder, under orders of the Sultan of 
Morocco, fought against Askia Daud on the left bank of the 
Niger River, t he army of Songhai was defeated because it had 
no firearms* The whole elite corps allowed itself to be decapi¬ 
tated rather than run away* 
I here also perished that day a large number of important 
people among the foot soldiers. When the army was defeated, 
they threw their shields on the ground and squatted on these 
sons of seats, awaiting the arrival of DjudeTs troops, who 
massacred them in this position without any resistance on their 
part; this because they were not to flee in case of rout. The 
Moroccan soldiers took the gold bracelets from their arms.'1 
I he army had a band consisting of drums, trumpets 
(kakaki, ef. Tarikh el Fettach, p. 156), and cymbals. When El 
Hadj revolted, he marched on Kaoga to the sound of such 
trumpets. “He had put on a breastplate and let the trum¬ 
peters, drummers, and so on, march ahead of him.”^2 


POLITICAL O R G A N1Z ATI O N 
r i y 
The war drum of the Darnel of Cayor was called Djung- 
Djung. It was used to beat out the bur dak ha Jjap remit, a 
march signifying: “The king follows [the enemy], catches him, 
kills him.” 
The auxiliary corps of the luareg vassals were composed 
essentially of camel-drivers; there must also have been an 
infantry armed with long javelins, marching ahead of the¬ 
ca mels and fighting according to the Berber technique, as 
described by Bakri. I he Tuaregs wore puffed trousers, a tunic, 
a turban, and a lithani. 
Flotilla 
I here existed on the Niger an entire flotilla no doubt 
composed of small boats equipped with outrigging—hence 
uncapsizable—like those found today on Lake Chad, Lake 
Victoria, and other large lakes of Central Africa. In case of 
war, this fleet was used for military purposes; the director of 
the port of I imbuktu or some other place where the battle 
took place then played a leading role. At the time of the war 
against Morocco, he was to hide the boats so Moroccan 
soldiers could not cross the river. 
Mahmud [leader of the Moroccan army] then decided to 
march against Askia Ishaq, first of all he set about procuring 
boats, since the director of the port, Mondzo-EI-Fa-uld-Zerka, 
had taken them all with him at the time of ins flight toward 
Binka, when Askia Ishaq had demanded the evacuation of the 
city of Timbuktu,5^ 
Those were the different corps that made up the African 
army of Songhai. I hey lacked one essential weapon, firearms; 
tley not have the time to acquire any because the very 
people who might have sold them to them, either manufac¬ 
turers (Europeans) or intermediaries (Arabs), took advantage 
c t^ns niaior weakness to try to conquer Black Africa. The 
rst firearms sold to the Africans exploded in their hands. 


1 20 
PRECOLON IA I. li LACK AFRICA 
Royal (hum! 
The king was surrounded by a very large body of guards 
in which the sons of vassal princes served side by side with 
other members of the nobility. 
Within i It is army, in which a lordly, aristocratic mentality 
reigned, the role of the griot assumed all its sociological 
significance. Through his songs, which were living accounts of 
the history of the country in general and the families whose 
members he addressed, he helped, he even forced the inde¬ 
cisive, fearful warrior to act bravely, and the brave to act like 
heroes, to perform miracles. His contribution to victory was 
very important: his bravery and often temerity were beyond 
question, for he too was as exposed to danger as the warriors 
whose exploits he celebrated; even at the height of battle, they 
needed to hear his exhortations which boosted their morale, 
1 he griots, then, were not superfluous beings; their usefulness 
was obvious: they had a “Homeric” social function to fulfill. 
The division of labor was thus valid at all levels of society. 
European conquest dimmed the interest to be found in the 
character of the griot, but it is impossible to give an historical 
account of the mentality of precolonial African armies with¬ 
out assessing his part in it. To a certain extent, he even held the 
face of the princes in his hands. After having been lectured by 
his mother, Otsman had given up all idea of revolt and was 
once again determined to obey his brother who had become 
Askia Daud; he even loaded some boats with food, to go and 
do him homage at the head of his troops. But the feelings of 
pride awakened by the song of his griot as he was setting forth 
were stronger than his sense of discipline: he no longer 
deemed it necessary to rub dust on his head as a sign of 
obeisance to anyone: 
But almost immediately, as his griot began to sing, lie went 
into such a fury that he almost burst with rage, and addressed 
his entourage, crying out, “Unload everything on the boats. 
Upon my life, the one speaking to you will no longer put any 
dust on his head for anyone.”5'* 
J 


l» O LIT1 C A !- OR CAN IZ ATI O N 
111 
Strategy and ladies 
Strategy and tactics were quite different from one country 
to another; there were different ways of combining the attacks 
of cavalry and infantry. The use of scouts and encampments 
with tents was common. 
Friday, the eighteenth of the month of Djomada hirst [April 
15, 1588], Balama Mohammed es-Sadcq camped with his 
ttoups at Konbo-Korai, After !iis tent was put up, the Baiama 
went inside and the first person who came to attack them was 
Marenfa-El-Hadj,55 
The Askia Daud also camped before the walls of Tim¬ 
buktu. “On his return, Askia Daud passed through Timbuktu 
and camped in this city in the square behind the mosque.”’6 
They carried on long sieges, lasting for years, with con¬ 
summate technique, in no way less expert than that of 
Agamemnon before Troy. This was the case in the siege of the 
city of Djenne by Sonni Ali. The cities were fortified by a 
system of ramparts, with a variable number of guarded gates. 
A fortified city was called a tat a, “Djenne is surrounded by a 
rampart with eleven gates. Three of them were later scaled, so 
that only eight remain today.”57 
To conquer a city thus fortified, which never before had 
been subjugated, if we are to believe the Tarikb e$ Sudan, 
Sonni Ali laid a siege which lasted seven years and some 
months. His camp was set up at Zoboro, former site of the 
city; he left there each day to fight before the walls until 
evening. I hose battle scenes took place daily throughout the 
entire low-water season. When the water rose, surrounding the 
walls of the city, making it unapproachable, he withdrew with 
his troops to the place which today bears his name: Nibkatu- 
Sonnj, or Sonni’s Hill. While waiting for the water to recede, 
the troops cultivated the soil to produce their own food. 
Things continued in this way until, at the end of seven years, 
Djenne surrendered, chiefly for lack of supplies. During that 
time, the king had died and his young son had replaced him. 


1 22 
P RE CO 1,0 N IA L BLACK AFRICA 
Sonni Ali treated the latter benevolently and married his 
mother.5* After his death, the city of Djenne was to keep his 
horse's trappings in a kind of museum as relics. 
According to Kati. however, the siege lasted only about 
six months, with some battles at night. Djenne was blocked, 
he reports, by four hundred warships. Since Sonni Ali reigned 
for only twenty-seven years, the duration of the siege indicated 
by Sadi does appear excessive. Perhaps the truth lies some¬ 
where between these two extremes (six months and seven 
years). Further research will enable us to come closer to the 
historical truth.59 
The effects of surprise and secret missions were in com¬ 
mon use. On August n, 1563, Askia Dand ordered the fari- 
mondzo Bokar to go and fight Bani, a rebel chief in Barka 
land. Bani was very clever and had in the past given much 
trouble to the central power. S he Askia resolved to keep secret 
the mission with which he had entrusted the fari-mondzo. 
I lie most unfavorable time of year for such a maneuver was 
chosen so as to overcome the vigilance of Bani, who could 
never have suspected that so many obstacles would be faced in 
order to reach him. The direction of the march also was 
unlikely: troops would go up into the mountains, from which 
they would then pour down, to the great surprise of the enemy 
who at most might have expected to sec them lining up on the 
usual horizon. I'lie fari’s troops were kept completely igno¬ 
rant of the goal and destination of the operation. Even the 
Askia’s son, who was along on the expedition, was unable to 
learn the secret known only to the general, the fari-mondzo. 
Thus, Bani was defeated. 
Military demonstrations were also used. Askia Daud, for 
one, deployed his forces as far as Mossi and Lulami country 
without engaging in battle or pillaging, for the sole purpose of 
impressing his neighbors and raking away any desire they 
might have to venture into the interior of his lands.61 
1 he Tarikb el Fettach also stresses the development of 
military science in Songhai, Its author underlines the diffu 


POLITICAL ORGAN I Z ATI ON 
i 23 
culties of the kurmina-fari’s expedition against 'enidda (Ten* 
gclla, I ia-N’Della), king of Futa. [endirma, the point of 
departure, was two months’ march away; even so, the expedi¬ 
tion was victoriously completed with a large army. The de¬ 
feated enemy was put to death and die troops returned with a 
great deal of booty (March 8, 1513).6 2 
Although the Cayorians were formidable warriors, their 
military tactics, until the accession of I,at Dior, seem not to 
have been so well regulated as in Songhai. 
I he knights charged in total anarchy, each one whenever 
he felt like it, after having gotten carefully “plastered” far in 
the rear; they felt that their noble station was incompatible 
with the idea of an organized command, especially when it 
was headed by a slave generalissimo, the diaraff bunt ker. I'he 
fact was, that they often arranged to let the foot soldiers take 
the first rounds of fire, the only ones that usually were fatal. 
I he firearms the Cayorians had at the end of the Darnel period 
were loaded with powder, pottery shards, and other small 
fragments of cast iron. It is easy to imagine that during a 
battle, the soldiers did not often have time to replace such 
loads. So, after the first rounds, what followed was nothing 
but fireworks, causing, at most, slight superficial burns. More 
than one brave knight chose such a moment to enter the fray, 
seeking out among the enemy knights a single personal adver¬ 
sary he might defeat; he fired his gun only when in sight of this 
enemy. He had sworn to do so on the eve of battle at the time 
of the “Khas": this was a ritual, often held at night, in which 
all the valiant warriors, plunging their lances repeatedly into a 
pile of sand they had surrounded, proclaimed their intended 
exploits for the next day. 
It was Lat Dior who probably introduced mobile war 
mto Cayor. before the technical superiority of Faidherbe’s 
armies, the Darnel, who had accepted the teachings of the 
French school, knew how to adapt to the situation. Instead of 
putting forward the bulk of his army, he divided it into small 
corps, posted at strategic points; so it was a war of harass- 


1 
i zq 
I’RECOLON IA L Bl.ACK AFRICA 
ment, a guerrilla war he waged against Faidherbe. I iis men 
even dug individual holes in the ground, fully covered, with 
just one opening through which to aim a weapon: a surprise 
salvo thus greeted the arrival of the enemy on the scene; this 
was the tactic called guedjo (individual hole). This period of 
mobile war was called the “Time of the Wcrwerlo” (whirling). 
Lat Dior stalked Faidherbe’s troops who were stalking his: so 
people wondered, with a touch ol mockery, who was chasing 
whom. 
JUDICIAL ORGANIZATION 
In the traditional empire, justice was inseparable from 
religion. It was a compensatory punishment ritually admin¬ 
istered to one who offended against social order. 
With Islamization, the situation became more complex: it 
became more and more secular, although its foundation re¬ 
mained religious, to the extent that the Koran was everywhere 
adopted as the civil code: Ghana, Mali, Songhai. 
However, there had always been throughout history two 
types ol justice: royal justice and the justice of the cadi. The 
cadi was the Muslim judge appointed by the king; he handled 
mainly common-law misdemeanors, disputes between cit¬ 
izens, or between citizens and foreigners. These were the sorts 
of cases under the jurisdiction of the cadi of Ghana or Tim¬ 
buktu. A tribunal was built for rendering justice. In Ghana, 
the procedures employed to make the accused confess were 
quite rudimentary; in cases of murder, or other crimes, or 
debts, the provost used the ordeal by water: the accused was 
brought before him rather than the king. A tribunal was built 
for the rendering of justice. The ordeal by water61 consisted of 
steeping a piece of special wood in a given quantity of water 
which the accused was then made to drink: il he vomited this 
bitter brew, he was innocent. I he ordeal by water was onlv a 
variant of the ordeal by fire practiced until present times in 
Black Africa, although prohibited by French law; the most 


POLITICAL ORGANIZATION 
1 2 3 
recent case I know of occurred around 1936: it was at Djurbel, 
in Senegal, in the Back It consisted of heating till it was white 
hot a thin metal blade, usually a sort of old spike polished in 
earth, which each of the accused in turn had to lick: the guilty 
ones were those who had swollen or split tongues the follow¬ 
ing day; truly a barbarous method, in every way comparable 
to those employed in the Middle Ages, mainly in the Ger¬ 
manic judicial system. The guilty, of course, sometimes con¬ 
fessed in time; but how many of the innocent must have been 
victims! The most extraordinary fact about it is that several 
defendants undeniably underwent this ordeal with success. 
This can be explained only by a large dose of self-suggestion, 
due to the mystical religious conviction widespread among 
the common people, according to which the innocent “could 
not” be burned. One can imagine the terrible result that might 
occur when an innocent defendant of skeptical temperament 
was involved. 
With the influx of merchants to Timbuktu and rhe de¬ 
velopment of the city’s international character, it was even¬ 
tually found necessary to name another judge, besides the 
cadi, of a dearly more profane character, qualified exclusively 
to settle disputes between foreigners or between foreigners 
and locals. One of them temporarily appointed, was Moham¬ 
med Baghoyo, a man of Wankorc origin, under Askia El 
Had j.64 
The cadis’ intellectual level was very high, their sense of 
duty very acute. One fact concerning the reign of Askia Ishaq 
proves this. I he Askia twice in vain offered the position of 
cadi to the jurist Abu-Hafs Omar, who refused it. Another 
jurist, Takonni, advised the Askia to threaten Abu-Hafs that 
he would appoint an ignorant man to the position, in which 
case, having so obstinately refused this office, Abu-Hafs would 
he responsible before God for the incompetence of all the 
judicial acts rendered. Only when reduced to this extreme did 
c accept and take office on February 1, 1585.65 
A judge’s house and a mosque were inviolable sanctu- 


PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
16 
aries. The cadi could with impunity admonish the king; to the 
princes, he was the respected intercessor whose words were 
heeded. When Said Mara was banished from society by Askia 
id Hadj, lie got as far as the mosque, where he took refuge, 
implored and obtained the intercession of the cadi with the 
sovereign, and was granted a pardon. 
A public crier announced the decisions of the cadi or the 
king when they affected the population at large. Common 
punishments were incarceration (there were prisons at Kan 
ato, at Kabara near Timbuktu, and elsewhere), confiscation of 
goods, and bastinado, which might accidentally prove fatal. I I 
I ladj's maternal uncle, who had organized a revolt against the 
Askia in favor of his nephew, died in this manner. 
Crimes of lesc-majestc and high treason were under the 
jurisdiction of the king. Thus, Askia Id Hadj insisted on 
himself judging all those who had participated in the conspir¬ 
acy aimed at toppling him from the throne; the punishments 
he inflicted on the guilty, as he himself pointed out, were based 
on the degree of their involvement in the revolt and the rank of 
their social positions. The same was true under Askia Ishaq II, 
who condemned the Homhori-koi to be sewn alive into a 
hull’s hide and buried in this way.66 
With Askia El Hadj, we see how royal justice banned a 
person from society. Said Mara was to be led throughout the 
city, while a crier announced his outlawry: this meant that 
anyone could henceforth kill him with impunity, since no law 
any longer protected his life. It was while he was being turned 
over to the mob that he took refuge in the mosque, under the 
protection of the imam.67 
In Mossi land, the Nakomsc (nobles) could be judged 
only by their peers, so to speak: the Moro Naha alone was 
qualified to do this. 
When the king was on his throne to render justice, in any 
part of Africa, he was the only one allowed to wear headgear, 
the symbol of dignity and wisdom. I he Pharoah of Egypt in 


PO LI I I CAL ORGANIZATION 
i 27 
the same position was referred to as the Atef although Egyp¬ 
tologists have been unable to find an exact term to translate 
this word. If Ate was a revised Egyptian verb, Atef would 
signify in Egyptian “he fudges,'1 assuming that this rout meant 
“to judged' it is interesting to note that Atef in Wolof means 
“let one judged1 Despite their very great importance, the cadis 
were dependent on the king. Whereas the t'arikh es Sudan 
gives 11s to understand that the one of Timbuktu was the most 
important of all, that all others were subordinate to him and 
he could remove them, the Tank el Vvttach is more cate¬ 
gorical: it was Askia Mohammed who appointed all the cadis 
of his kingdom: “Thus it was that he appointed a cadi at 
Timbuktu, a cadi in the city of Djcnne, and a cadi in each city 
of his territory which had one, from the Kama to the Sib- 
iridugud*68 
idle use of notarized documents was widespread. The 
author of the Tarikh e$ Sudan, for example, was asked to draw 
up a notarized inventory of the goods belonging to a convict, 
one Salti, when he went to prison, during the war with 
Morocco: 
Tuesday, when we entered the prison, we found the unfor¬ 
tunate Sain in a pitiful state. I read him the register of the 
inventory, and as he declared that this was indeed Ins entire 
fortune, we attested to it in writing on the register to vouch for 
its authenticity/9 
1 he author was accompanied by another notary. 
Ibn Battuta described the spirit of immanent justice in 
the people and the security which covered foreigners and their 
goods, two facts worthy of a society already open to interna¬ 
tional affairs. 
Acts of injustice are rare among them; of all the peoples, 
they arc the one least inclined to commit any, and the Sultan 
(Black king) never pardons anyone who is found guilty of them. 
Dver the whole of tin country7, there reigns perfect security; one 
can live and travel there without fear of theft or rapine. They do 


PRECO LONIA L BLACK AFRICA 
I z8 
not confiscate the goods of white men who die m their country ; 
even though they may be of immense value, they do not touch 
them. On the contrary, they find trustees for the legacy among 
white men and leave it in their hands until the rightful benfici- 
artes come to claim it. 1 2 3 4 5 * * 8 9 10 11 
So wrote Battuta in i 3 5 2.—53, at the time of the 1 kindred 
Years War, relating the good he found in the behavior of the 
Blacks. 
In certain holy cities dominated by the clergy, such as 
Timbuktu, Diaba in Mali, Kundiuro in Diara, the cadi had 
the right of pardon or punishment (life and death) over the 
accused. It Kati is to be believed, the Mansa of Mali could not 
enter the sacred city' of Diaba even if the murderer of his son 
had taken refuge there, because it was the city of God, where 
salvation was guaranteed to all fugitives.71 Such must have 
been the case of N’Diare, the holy city of the N’Diaye in 
Senegal. 
Judges must often have been unpopular for quite human 
reasons; that explains the numerous refusals of appointments 
related by Kati and Sadi. 
N O T E S 
1. Leroi-Gourhan, op> cit., p. too, 
2. Al Bakri, oft.at., “Route de Gahana a Ghiarou,*' pp. 54-36* 
3. Idem., “Description de Ghana et moeurs dc ses habitants," pp, 
528, 
4. Idem., “Route du Dera m pays des NoirsG pp. 309-318. 
5. lbn Khaldun, op, cit.t p. i 12, 
6* Al Bakri, op, cit,f “Route de Tademekka a Gahdames,” p. 341. 
7* lbn Khaldun, op, cit., p. mi. 
8. Delafosse, I.es Noin de VAfrique (Paris: i d. Payot, 1922k p. 62, 
9. lbn Khaldun, op, cit,, pp. 114-115* 
10. lbn Battuta, op, at,, p. 10* 
11. Presence Africaine magazine, No. XVIII-XIX, Feb.-May 1958, pp- 
176-17?- 
ii. lbn Khaldun, op, cit,, p. M y, 
i


V o L I TI c A L O R G A N I Z AT I O N 
I Z9 
13, Sadi, TSM eh. XIII, p, in. X4* Idem., Ill, 14, 
15. He was rhe first to assume the title of Dali, which, in African tradition, 
is the equivalent of Caesar. 
16. Sadi, T.S., XII, 104. 17. Idem,,XVI], t?8* 18. Idem.* XVI, 
164. 
19, idem., XVII, 174. 20. Idem., V, 14, 21. Idem., XIII, rzr. 
22, ibn Khaldun, op. atp. 107. Sadi, T.S.t VII, 40. 
24* Idem., XVI, 164* 
25, Al Bakri, op. cit., “Description dc Ghana et moeurs de ses habitants/' 
p. 3 JO. 
26, Idem., p. 330, 27. Ibn Khaldun, op. at., p. 115. 
z8, Could Kaarta derive from Carthago? (See map p. 000,; 
19■ Al Bakri, op. nf., p. 334. 30. Sadi, T.S., XIII, 129-130. 
31. Idem., XVIII, 193. 31. Idem., XXVII, 298. 33. idem., II, ro¬ 
ll. 
34. ldm», XVII, 171-172. Idem., XIII, 1 16-117. 
36, II, 12. 37. Delafosse, Haut-Senegal-hUger, op. cit, 
38. Sadi, T.S., XIV, 134-1 35. 39, Ifa, XXL, 216, 
40. Idem., VII, 40. 41, Idem., XVIII, 1H5, 42. Idem., IV, 20. 
43, Idem., V, 23. 44. Idem., XIII, ir8. 45. Idem., XVIII, 190- 
192, 
46. Mem., XIX, 199, 47. Idem., XX, 204. 4S. Idem., XXI, 216- 
217. 
49. 1 his also happened to the Crusaders on the mads of Palestine. 
50, Sidi, i \S., XXVII, 30T-302. 51, Idem., XXI, 219-220. 
S2> Idem., XVII, Iill. 53. Idem., XXI, 226. 54. Idem.. XIV, 136. 
55. Idem., XX, 103. 36. Idem., XVII, 178. 57. Idem., V, 23. 
38, Idem., V, 26-27. SV- et. Kati, T’.F., cli. V, pp. 94-100. 
Sadi, T.S., XVII, 175. 61. Idem., XVII, 179, 62. Kati, T.F., 
HI, 74. 
63. VI Bakri, op, cit., “Route de Ghana a Ghlamu,” p. 315-336. 
64. Sadi, T.S., XVIII, 190. 65. idem., he. cit. 66. Idem., XX, 
205. 
67. Idem., XX, 207-208. 68. Kati, T.F., VI, 115. 
69. Sadi, IS., XXXIII, 360-161. 70. Ibn Battuta, op. iff., pp. 19—20. 
7i. Kati, 7XVI, 114. 


Chapter Six 
economic: organization 
Africa, in the eyes of the specialists, is depicted as a land which 
prior to colonization was only at the level of a subsistence 
economy: the individual, virtually crushed by the force of 
nature, was able to produce only what be absolutely needed to 
survive. No creation, no activity reflecting a society freed from 
material constraints might be found there. Fxchangc rela¬ 
tionships were governed by barter. Notions of money, credit, 
stock market, thrift, or accumulation of wealth by individuals 
belong to a type of commerce connected with a higher eco¬ 
nomic organization: they could nor have been found at the 
alleged level of African economy. 
Seldom has an opinion been so little founded on fact. 
This one arose from a preconceived idea of African societies: 
they had to be specifically primitive, therefore endowed in 
every' respect with systems characteristic of such a condition. 
BARTER 
Undeniably, at the periphery of the African kingdoms, 
some backward tribes, such as the Lem-Lem in Southwest 
Ghana, perhaps on the banks of the present-day hale me River, 
had been carrying on barter trade since the Carthaginian 
period,1 Herodotus attests to this. That situation remained 
inflexibly unaltered until the twelfth century, as corroborated 
by the accounts of Arab travelers, e.g., lbn Yakut. For these 


economic: organization 
i 31 
peoples, in every way comparable to the still-unassimilated 
barbarians who roamed on the outskirts of the Roman Em- 
pire, the notion of merchandise in the modern sense was 
probably unknown: barter was the foundation of all their 
commercial activity. After crossing the desert separating 
Ghana from Upper Senegal, the Arabs reached the banks of 
the Faleme, unloaded their goods in small bunches (varied 
products from the Orient), gave a signal, and then retreated; 
the Africans then came out and in front of each bundle placed 
the quantity of gold dust they judged it to be worth, then 
withdrew. l"hc Arabs came back and collected the gold if they 
found the amounts satisfactory; if not, the cycle was repeated, 
still without any direct contact. Sociologists and ethnologists 
agree that commerce conducted under such conditions ex¬ 
cludes any awareness of merchandise: the gold in this instance 
is not even money, but a local product which is traded for 
goods or other materials not native to the country. 
! hese tribes living in a virtually closed society had much 
less need for the glittering Oriental baubles to improve their 
living conditions than did the Carthaginian and Arab traders 
for the gold they “harvested.” One may assume, therefore, 
from the very' fact that they were in a less developed state, that 
the honesty governing these exchanges came from them; they 
imposed it, from the start. If they were swindled, they could, 
without loss to the essentials of their life, suspend relations 
with anv given group of traders so identified. 
Th is was the nature of commerce along the borders of the 
kingdom. Only by applying it, in a misguided generalization, 
to all the rest of the continent, could one reach the abovemen- 
tioned theories. 
Modern-type commerce 
In actuality, there was another form of commercial ac¬ 
tivity, already modern in type, that was much more extensive. 


T32 
P RE COLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
covering all of the kingdoms. It was carried on by die 
organized and most dynamic elements of society, by those, i n 
a word, who were already detribalizcd. 'I'here were already 
.*entire merchant classes in the empire of Ghana and Songhai. 
I he Ulrikh es Sudan alludes to their activities iti the already- 
international centers of Timbuktu and Djenne.- 
The density of Niger River traffic between these two cities 
at that period could never be suspected today. Kabara was the 
true military and commercial port through which all goods 
were exported from Timbuktu, to Djenne, Mali, and the Up¬ 
per Niger in general, or Tirekka, Gao, and lademekka, Kukia 
and the Dendi country, that is, present-day Upper Dahomey 
(Benin). According to the Tarikh el hettach, entire groups 
were devoted to commerce: 
If you ask what difference there is between the Malinke 
and the Uangara, know that the Uangaras and Malinkes share 
the same origin, but that Malinke is used to designate the 
warriors, whereas Uangara serves to indicate the merchants 
who carry on trading from one country' to another.4 
Bakri likewise informs us that the Nunghamarra were a 
group of traders who exported gold from Iresni, on the Upper 
Senegal, to all countries. This city is very close to the gold¬ 
hearing stronghold of Ghiaru, previously mentioned.4 After 
the destruction of Carthage by Scipio Africanus Minor, the 
Roman expedition which pursued the fleeing Carthaginians 
to discover where they got their gold, reached this point, the 
source of the Bambuk (the name given by the Romans to the 
Senegal River). 
Th e existence of whole groups devoted to commerce (the 
ancestors of the present-day Djula and Sarakolle) being con¬ 
firmed, there remains to be defined the type of exchange they 
practiced. I he characteristics of modern economic activity 
could already be detected in it: the existence of money, a well 
defined tariff system, and cosmopolitan commerce centers 
throughout each country. In addition to the two previously 


F. C O NOM1C ORGANI /. AT I O N 
1 33 
mentioned cities, Timbuktu and Djennc, known as far as Asia 
and burope, tlicrc were Bjru, Son, Ndob, l**ke$/ and so on. In 
all these centers foreign nationals had their own quarters in 
which they could live in the utmost security with their goods, 
while pursuing their business.6 Bor the most part these were 
Arabs from North Africa, Egypt, and Yemen, and Europeans, 
especially Spaniards. Some of them were even students in 
Timbuktu, as will be seen later. Black Africa was hospitable to 
foreigners. We already know that the king of Djennc wished 
for there to be more foreigners than natives in his capital, but 
his last wish—the last of three—was “that God might weary 
all those who had come only to peddle their wares, so that, 
bored with staying in this place, they might sell their shoddy 
goods at bargain prices, ro the benefit of the inhabitants.”7 
CURRENCY 
Economic concerns existed on all levels. The sale of 
goods was strictly regulated: there were fixed market days. 
The economic officer of the city then levied taxes in the name 
of the king; they might be paid in either goods or cash, 
especially in limbuktu. As earlier observed, an appropriate 
duty was placed at the border on all goods imported or 
exported.8 
The currency used consisted of salt, cowries, or gold in 
either dust or pieces (of foreign or local mintage). It at first 
glance might appear astonishing that blocks or pieces of salt 
of different sizes should constitute a currency. It must be 
remembered in this regard that certain substances such as salt 
and copper were as rare in Africa at that time as gold was 
abundant; indeed in certain regions copper jewelry was more 
highly prized than that of gold; in ancient times, gold was less 
expensive than copper in Nubia, that is, the Sudan, of which 
Khartoum is the present capital. According to Bakri, salt was 


PRECOLONIAL B LACK AFRICA 
1 34 
worth its weight in gold among the people he calls El Peru in, 
who were said to be in Northern Senegal in the vicinity of the 
Lake of Guiers,9 The value assigned to any substance is al¬ 
ways in terms of its rarity. Thus, cowries which came from the 
Indian Ocean via Persia, according to Leo Africanus, could 
serve as currency. It was, therefore, not a matter of backward 
peoples unable to conceive and produce coins of gold or other 
metals, for, as we shall see, such coinage was very widespread 
in Black Africa at the time. 
As for gold dust, a conventional quantity of approx¬ 
imately 4.6 grams (probably more often measured than 
weighed) constituted what was called the mitkdl of gold dust; 
this was the gold standard, in the strictest modern sense of the 
term, on the basis of which minted coins (whose composition 
might be adulterated with nonprecious metals), as well as 
cowries, were exchanged. The mitkdl, depending on the rates 
of exchange, was worth anywhere from 500 to 3,000 cowries, 
available documents inform us,10 
Obviously, all this was relative to prevailing conditions, A 
gold-dust standard was used because in this form the metal 
was more difficult to adulterate. 
Identical weights of gold or heavier ones were effectively 
turned into coins with embossed designs at mints, for com¬ 
mercial exchange purposes, as evidenced by this passage from 
Idrisi, about gold collection among the Lem-Lcm: 
When the river returns to its bed, everyone sells his gold. 
The bulk of it is bought by the inhabitants of Wardjelan [in 
present-day Libya] and by those from the tip of West Africa, 
whither this gold is transported to the mints, coined into 
dinars, and traded commercially for goods. This is how it 
happens each year. This is the principal product of the land of 
the Blacks; great and small, they make it their livelihood. In the 
country of the Uangara there are flourishing cities and re¬ 
nowned fortresses, its inhabitants are wealthy; they possess 
gold in abundance, and receive the products brought to them 
from the other remotest portions of the earth, I hey attire them- 


F. G O N O M IC O R G A N IZ AT i O N 
•35 
selves in robes and other kinds of raiment; they are altogether 
black,11 
One remark made by Bakri about the Berbers of lad- 
emekka indicates that coins without markings must have been 
rather rare in Africa, After having described the kind of pros¬ 
titution customary among them (the women grabbing hold of 
strangers), he gets around to mention of the sort of money 
they used: “The dinars they used were of pure gold and were 
called sola [bald] because they bore no imprints. "12 
Thus tiiese documents allow us to be sure of the use in 
Black Africa of imprinted gold coins, without, however, being 
able to know whether such imprints were effigies of local 
emperors or kings, or to know' whether there was any gener¬ 
alized imperial currency minted apart from the rnitkal stan¬ 
dard. The situation must have been comparable to that of the 
Greco-Latin city-kingdoms after the invention of money by the 
Lydians in the sixth century' r.c.; among other peculiarities, 
each of these cities had its own system of measures and, as a 
result, its own urban coinage stamped with the city’s coat of 
arms; there existed no accepted relation of the exchange value 
of these currencies. According to the Tarikb el Tettacb, Askia 
Daud "was the first to build financial depositories and even 
libraries.”11 
So there existed in West Africa a whole gamut of curren¬ 
cies usable according to the value of the goods purchased. 
There was even a curious sort of currency in the form of 
squares of fabric (four spans to each side) manufactured in the 
textile center of Terenka, on the Upper Senegal, according to 
Rak ri; these squares, called chigguiya, were in use at Silla, also 
on the Senegal, along with other currencies such as salt, 
copper rings, and dor a, a cereal.14 
1 he Tarikb es Sudan mentions, in describing the poverty 
resulting from the Moroccan occupation of Timbuktu, the 
existence of a "stock exchange” in that city; “The exchange 
rate fell to 500 cowries . . .”I-S 


P RE COLONIAL ULACK AFRICA 
A remark by Ibn Haukal attests to the use of acknowledg¬ 
ment of debts in writing and at the same time gives an idea of 
the enormous wealth of the country: he saw a text in which an 
inhabitant of Sijiitnasa acknowledged his indebtedness to a 
citizen of Aoudaghast in the sum of 40,000 dinars. To the 
author of The Book of Roads and Kingdoms, such an occur¬ 
rence was unique in the trading world of the tenth century. 
Even in Baghdad, the capital of the Orient, one could find 
nothing like it.16 So Africa was distinguished in the world for 
its legendary wealth which led the Arabs to say: “Against the 
camel’s mange use tar, and against poverty make a trip to the 
Sudan.” 
IMPORT-EXPORT 
The exported materials were gold, iron, tin, etc. Domes¬ 
tically, commerce in cola nuts, cereals such as data, and millet 
from which a kind of beer was fermented, was active; the same 
was true for weaponry: spears, javelins, arrows, bows, etc. As 
for manufacture, one might mention the glass industry which 
had made extraordinary strides in Benin. Commerce between 
East Africa and India and China was no less active in the tenth 
and eleventh centuries. In that region, contrary to common 
opinion, the tribal stage was outgrown: the land was united 
into one great monarchy under the Monomotapa. Metals, 
gold, tin, copper were exploited largely for his own personal 
gain, according to well-established procedures. Organization 
of the work was very advanced. Experts have estimated the 
quantity of tin mined at Rockpoort as approximately thirty 
thousand tons. The experts went to the East and the Chinese 
Far East through the port of Sofala. There was a whole mer¬ 
chant class; its conflicts with the Arab immigrants are de¬ 
scribed in a book by Burueg Bin Shariya entitled Of the 
National Pride of Negroes and their Disputes with White 


ECONO M i C ORGANIZATION 
I 37 
Men. All of these facts concerning East Africa are taken from a 
study by M. A. Jaspan.17 
In West Africa, the products imported were wheat, rai¬ 
sins, figs, Saharan salt, cowries, copper, dates, henna, olives, 
tanned hides, silk, doth, brocade, Venetian pearls and mir¬ 
rors, and so on. Tobacco was probably introduced into Mus¬ 
lim West Africa at this time.18 Other products such as gum, 
gummiferous mimosa, cucurbitaceae, and euphorbiae added 
to the trade. Bakri tells of a strange plant that existed at the 
time: it yielded a kind of fireproof wool that was woven into 
clothing; it was called turzi. But among the Berbers there was 
a stone possessing the same properties when softened. So we 
may well conclude that this strange product was asbestos, 
rather than a plant. I he Berbers from the region of Tad* 
emakka and the Blacks of Bornu locally mined a kind of agate 
that was sold as far away as Ghana: in rite Sudan it is made, up 
to the present day, into necklaces and pendants of impressive 
size. Along the Senegal River, according to Bakri, whips of 
worldwide reputation were made of hippopotamus hides.tv 
MEANS OF TRANSPORTATION, ROADS 
The usual method of transportation in the interior of 
Black Africa was on a donkey, ox, camel, or “mongrel” horse, 
where there were no navigable waterways. Connection to the 
Mediterranean and Egypt, across the Sahara, was made by 
camel caravans. It is important to stress that this commercial 
initiative was taken by Arabs and not by Africans, who traded 
only at the domestic markets of Djcnnc, Timbuktu, Walcra, 
Aoudaghast, Gao, and so on. It seems that the wealth of the 
continent always made it unnecessary for its inhabitants to 
risk the dangers of the high seas or the great international 
routes for commercial purposes, likewise, in ancient times, 
Ethiopians and Egyptians virtually never left their homelands. 


Regions, towns and peoples 
of prccolonial Africa (eleventh 
to sixteenth centuries). 


Timbuktu 
Senega1 
WaiataV 
l ^ Mom a 
Gharentel 
Ghana \ 
Samakanda , s. 
Ghiaru 
Commercial routes between the Mediterranean area 
and Africa in the eleventh century* 
1 
Marrakesh \ 
\ S'J-lmasa 
TAFILEu 
ua\ 
adrar; 
(J,®1 I 
\ 
&>' AoudaghasO 
<P 
— Jk 
I 
MOSSI EMPIRE 


PRFCO I.ON1 A I. BLACK AFRICA 
i 40 
Egypt possessed .ill the technical means and material re¬ 
sources to assure tier mastery ol the seas; but throughout the 
course of her history she left it to her cousin, I’hoenccia. 
Except for a few solitary navigators, mentioned in tales and 
legends, not until the Eighteenth Dynasty did she build a fleet 
on the Red Sea, Egypt was born and remained an essentially 
continental power. Neither she nor Nubia ever became trad 
mg nations. 
One might suppose that, during the precolonial period. 
West Africa was not technologically capable of taking to sea, 
and attempt to explain in this way the absence of African 
maritime commerce created by local initiative. Some docu 
inents which we will quote below prove that this point of view 
is not acceptable. Even it it were, there was nothing in any case 
to prevent the peoples of the African empires from establishing 
camel caravans, as the Arabs did, and transporting their wares 
to the shores of the Mediterranean. All the technological 
conditions required for the Africans to develop caravans and 
become international traders by crossing the Sahara were at 
hand. But they never did so, because economic abundance 
■r 
and their own social structure obviated this necessity. So the 
Jr 
dromedary' has remained to this day in the use of Arab traders 
alone; it is the ideal animal for crossing the desert. I his is 
why: not only can it endure thirst, but it is able to store in its 
body hundreds of liters of water which if need be can be 
restored to a more or less drinkable condition by slaughtering 
the beast. In this way, camel-drivers have with them a ready 
supply of meat and water. 
According to I bn Battuta, the roads in the interior of 
Africa were absolutely safe: “I laving decided to visit the latter 
city [Mali), I hired but one Mcssufitc to serve as my guide 
since there is no need to travel by caravan, for the roads arc 
that secure."’0 
From the documents left by Bakri, we can describe the 
network of routes that connected Black Africa with the Medi- 


HCONOM 1C ORGANIZATION 
i 4 i 
teiranean and the Orient, its complexities, and the traveling 
conditions of tin- caravans. Along most ot the routes there 
were few wells of drinking water: it took several days’ travel to 
reach one. One can see on the map that two principal routes 
connected the South Sahara with Black Africa: one of them 
went from Wadi Draa to Aoudaghast; the other started out 
from Sijilmasa and went to Tamcddt and Uami, which was a 
crossroads tor all the routes leading to Black Africa. It took 
fifty-one days from Sijilmasa to Aoudaghast. The wells along 
them were, tor the former, Tezamet, Bit* el Djemmilin, and 
Nalili; and for the latter, Camel-drivers’ Well or Hir el Djem- 
meliu . . . The trip took two weeks from Aoudaghast to the 
imperial capital ot Ghana; front Ghana to Silla, along the 
Upper Senegal, the caravans took twenty days; front Ghana to 
Gao, two weeks; front (ihana to Augham, probably five days; 
from there to Ras Elma, four days; from this center to Tiraka, 
on the Niger, six days; from Gao to Tadcmekka, nine days 
were required; front there to Ghadames across the desert, forty 
days; from this crossroads to Tripoli, eleven days; and, finally, 
from Ghadames one went to Kairmian.--1 
KCONOMIC WltALTU 
I'ront the economic point of view, Africa is characterized 
by abundance. Travelers of the prccolonial era encountered no 
poverty there; according to the Tarikh el kethu b, the emperor 
of Ghana, seated upon a “platform of red gold,” daily treated 
the people of his capital to ten thousand meals.22 Such mate¬ 
rial comfort resulted in an increase in demographic density 
scarcely imaginable today: in the region of Djenne alone there 
were 71O77 villages. 
The following fact is enough to give us an idea of the 
proximity of these villages one to another. If the sultan, for 
example, wishes to summon a person inhabiting a village situ- 


"1 
14Z PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
ated in the neighborhood of Lake I>ebo, his chosen messenger 
betakes himself to one of the gateways of the ramparts and, 
from there, cries out the message he has been charged to convey. 
The people, from village to village, repeat this call and tin 
message immediately reaches the intended party wlvo goes to 
the convocation sent to him. No need for further demonstra¬ 
tion to show how densely this territory is populated.2* 
Under the Askia El Hadj a census taken by a group of 
students which lasted three davs established that Gao con- 
4 
sisted of 7,626 blocks of houses of solid construction (clay?), 
not counting straw huts.24 
It has been estimated that the slave trade swallowed up 
one hundred to three hundred million individuals, dead or 
shipped to America. So, had it not been for slavery, the total 
figure ot Black population on the continent would probably 
have been four times what it now is: it would have been in the 
vicinity of four hundred million. The larikh cs Sudan stresses 
how exceptional poverty was in Black Africa when describing 
that caused by the Moroccan occupation of Timbuktu: 
The high cost of food in Timbuktu was excessive; a great 
number of people died of hunger and the famine was such that 
people ate the corpses of draft animals and of human beings. 
The exchange rate toll to soo cowries. I hen the plague came in 
turn to decimate the population and killed many that the 
famine had spared. I his high cost of food, which lasted two 
years, mined the inhabitants, who were reduced to selling their 
furniture and utensils. All the elders were unanimous in saying 
that they had never seen such a calamity and that not one of the 
elders before them had ever told them of anything like it.2s 
COMPARISON OF SOCIO-ECONOMIC STRUCTURES IN 
AFRICA AND EUROPE 
I 
The time has now come to examine the passage from 
feudal production to capitalist production in Europe, to see 


ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION 
143 
whether such a development, such a transformation occurred 
in the African economy of the corresponding period. And if 
not, why not? 
Karl Marx showed in Das Kapital that the feudal organi¬ 
zation in the countryside and the corporations in the cities for 
a long time kept the money-capital, resulting from usury and 
commerce in the Middle Ages, from being transformed into 
industrial capital. The upheaval which was to give birth to 
modern capitalism, according to the same author, began at 
the end of the fifteenth century and developed with increasing 
intensity during the sixteenth, especially in England. Royalty 
and parliament went to war against the feudal lords to tty to 
win back central authority. In increasingly difficult circum¬ 
stances, the lords successively got rid of everything super¬ 
fluous in their lives; that meant liquidation of the “lordly 
entourages,'' and the abandonment of pomp in court life. 
Then came the first exodus of country folk to the cities. 
Overnight, there was thus created a proletariat without either 
hearth or home, whose numbers would go on increasing even 
more for other reasons. Against the violent repression of king 
and parliament, the lords reacted by progressively confiscating 
the lands of all the peasants who were tilling the soil under 
“feudal tenure”: serfdom was no more. Those formerly hound 
to the soil were now independent peasants, at most paying 
some fixed tribute to the lord. Then these peasants in turn 
were driven into the cities. The movement of expropriation 
spread to the ecclesiastical communal domains by a system ot 
enclosure," which consisted purely and simply of annexing 
the lands adjoining the lord's domain by putting a fence 
around them. The lords had in fact found that, due to the 
prodigious development of the manufacture ot woolens in 
Handers, it was henceforth more profitable to turn all the 
arable lands into pastures for raising wool-bearing sheep. 
hater, some domains of the Scottish highlands would be 
turned into hunting forests, for profit. “Ot cities and townes 


'44 
PRF, COLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
. . . pulled downe for shcepe-walks, and no more but the 
lordships now standing in them ... 1 could saie somewhat.”26 
Conditions suitable for the birth of capitalism had been 
created. For this system to appear, as Marx says, there must be 
a separation between work and working conditions, making a 
true class ol wage-earners, in the modern sense of the term. 
Before expropriation, the peasant family tilling the soil at the 
same time carried on a whole range of artisanal activities, 
constituting cottage industry: they wove their clothes from the 
(lax they harvested, and manufactured most of the things they 
needed. In becoming a wage-earner, the peasant no longer 
had anything but the strength of his labor to sell to urban 
manufacturers or country farmers: he could no longer pro¬ 
duce at home the things he needed for domestic use, but had 
to buy them as manufactured products on the home market 
which the capitalist circuit had established between coun¬ 
tryside and city. 
A man who, to begin with, inherited or could borrow 
enough money, might go the country and sublet from the lord 
a part of his land: he became a farmer to whom the land was 
“leased.” His capital was all he had to work with. In a second 
phase, he might hire hands to work his land: he became the 
rural capitalist supplying raw materials to feed the industries 
o( the cities. From him, the manufacturer would get the flax 
for his weaving; the one and the other found it to their interest 
to pay the lowest possible wages for the greatest amount of 
work: no matter that working conditions might he inhumane, 
that workers might become “alienated.” This form of eco¬ 
nomic activity would constantly he dominated by the goal of 
profit and superprofit. It would not take long for the impor¬ 
tance of manpower to he minimized by the introduction of the 
machine. The capitalist system thus appears better suited to 
the development of applied science than had been the one 
based on domestic economy which it had just destroyed. I he 
use of machinery was limited and unnecessary in the latter, 
because there was no concern with profit and productivity i'1 


IiC O N O M IC O RGANI 2AT] O N 
‘45 
the capitalistic sense of the term. So it would seem to be more 
judicious to explain the development of mechanization by the 
needs of capitalist production, rather than to justify the sys¬ 
tem as being a consequence of the use of machinery. The needs 
of the new home market thus created, with its peculiar struc¬ 
ture, and those of the world market, resulting from the great 
voyages of discovery, would constantly stimulate the economic 
activity of the European countries: the modern type of trading 
country had thus been created, the very type whose wealth 
excludes that of the people. 
Of course, the newly created proletariat was not entirely 
and automatically absorbed by industry; but it was subject to 
the law of supply and demand. The unemployment which 
resulted turned a great many individuals into vagabonds, 
thieves, or vagrants, as they were called. This ever-increasing 
flood of unemployed hands finally frightened the masters of 
industry, although they had at first seen it as a happy divine 
intervention intended to make the economy prosper. The 
parliaments of the different European countries soon began to 
consider it the germ of future revolutionary troubles, i here 
was, as yet, no experience of modern revolutions: it had not yet 
been sufficiently realized that in order to be revolutionary, it 
was not enough to he numerous and malcontented, but that 
organization and education were required. So a panic, as 
widespread as it was unadmitted, took hold of the parliamen¬ 
tary legislators and led them to pass laws so terrible, so 
coercive that it is hard tor us to imagine them today. In 1530, 
in England, under the reign of 1 lenry VIII, a vagrant picked up 
ret the second time was whipped and had half an ear cut off; 
taken for a third time, he was “to be executed as a hardened 
criminal and enemy of the common weal.”27 Seventy-two 
thousand vagrants were thus executed during that reign. In the 
time of Edward VI (i 547), “if anyone refuses to work, he shall 
e condemned as a slave to the person who denounced him as 
reicr. ’2S 1 he owner of such a slave might whip him, chain 
mi> LlrRl brand him on cheek and forehead with a letter S (for 


146 PRECOI.ONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
Slave), if he disappeared for two weeks. If he ran away a third 
time he was executed. 
1 he master can sell him, bequeath him, let him out on hire 
as a slave, just as any other personal chattel or cattle. If the 
slaves attempt anything against the masters, they are also to be 
executed. Justices of the peace, on information, are to hunt the 
rascals down,29 
An idler caught on the highway was branded on the chest 
w*th a V (for Vagrant) and returned to his native city, whose 
slave he became, doing municipal work without pay, held in 
irons. If he gave the name of a false city, he was nonetheless 
made its slave, marked with an S, Inhabitants of the said city 
were allowed to take possession of his offspring, present and 
future, and keep them as apprentices until the age of twenty- 
four for boys and twenty for girls. If the latter tried pre¬ 
maturely to take their freedom, they automatically became the 
slaves of their employers, who whipped and chained them. 
They had the right to weld on the neck, arm, or leg of the slave 
an iron ring, as a distinctive mark to keep him from escaping. 
Slaves of towns or parishes subsisted into the nineteenth cen¬ 
tury, under the name of roundsmen, as Marx points out. 
1 he same laws remained in force under the reign of 
Elizabeth (1572). An eighteen-year-old vagrant, arrested for 
the second time, was to be executed “unless some one will 
take them into service for two years . . .” Under the reign of 
Queen Bess “rogues were trussed up apace, and in one year 
commonly . . . three or four hundred were . . . devoured and 
eaten up by the gallowes.”w I he situation was exactly the 
same under James !: idlers were branded with the letter R (for 
Rogue) on their left shoulders. Only in 1715 was this legisla¬ 
tion abolished in England. Similar laws existed in France. 
Until the beginning of the reign of Louis XVI, 
every man in good health from 16 to 60 years of age, if without 
means of subsistence but not practising a trade, is to be sent to 
the galleys. Of the same nature are the statute of Charles V for 
the Netherlands (October, 1537), the first edict of the States 


F.C O N OMI C ORGAN! Z ATI ON 
147 
and Towns of Holland (March 10, 161:4), the “Plakaat" of the 
United Provinces (June 26, 1649), etc, 
Because of all these European-originated deportations, it 
can he asserted without exaggeration that present-day Amer¬ 
ica is populated in part by citizens of slave (or indentured) 
origin, whether they he white or black. 
To conclude, we must recall the terrible conditions under 
which child labor was exploited, the one-sided legislation on 
wages that was constantly intended to favor the employer. 
Thus the capitalistic ownership of the social means of 
production by the few was the negation and superseding of the 
“dwarf property” of the earlier domestic economy. According 
to Marx, in the latter, because of the excessive spreading of the 
means of production among an infinite number of individuals, 
there was no possibility of cooperation in production on any 
large scale, nor of the 
. . . division of labour within each separate process of produc¬ 
tion, the control over, and ihe productive application of the 
forces of Nature by society, and the free development of the 
social productive forces. It is compatible only with a system of 
production, and a society, moving within narrow or more or 
less primitive bounds. To perpetuate it would be, as Pecc|ueur 
rightly says, ‘‘to decree universal mediocrity.”*2 
1 he accidents of European history which led to the sys¬ 
tematic expropriation of the peasants arc not general laws. But 
Without this phenomenon of expropriation, capitalism would 
not have come to be. One would therefore like to know the 
immutable sociological laws which explain the necessary pas- 
s<lgc from the stage of domestic economy to capitalism, in all 
societies; to know why India, China remained for millennia in 
re ative stagnation, despite the terrible poverty which existed 
m, those countries; why the industrious population of Japan, 
Wit its great density which necessitated microcultivation, did 
Haf an identical evolution; why the politico-social 
. ailce of Africa was broken only at contact with an external 
uence. lo what degree does the ideological superstructure 


14# PRECOLON IAL BLACK AFRICA 
constitute, for some social structures, an iron collar equivalent 
to an immense weight holding down the society for some 
unpredictable period, thus outweighing for a long time such 
material factors as poverty? 
Modern capitalism, wherever it may be found, is a Euro¬ 
pean export and not the result of natural local evolution. \\4 
may therefore regret that there is no precise answer to these 
questions to be found in I)<i$ Kapitat. The latter indicates onh 
that when this industrial regime of small independent pro¬ 
ducers reaches a certain stage of development, 
it brings forth the material agencies for its own dissolution. 
From that moment new forces and new passions spring up in 
the bosom of society ... It must be annihilated; n is annihi¬ 
lated. Its annihilation, the transformation ol the individualised 
and scattered means ot production into socially concentrated 
ones, of the pigmy property of the many into the huge property 
of the few . . . this fearful and painful expropriation of the mass 
of the people forms the prelude to the history of capital. *' 
No writer until this date has ever attempted to evaluate 
correctly the “stage" after which the material agencies of 
dissolution are engendered so that the necessary historical 
transformation can take place. Domestic industry is the die¬ 
sis, capitalism is the antithesis, but the dialectical link, the 
path inexorably leading from the one to the other, has not 
been recognized and described in satisfactory fashion for all 
societies. At any rate, it goes without saying, some societies 
today can he spared the capitalist phase. 
Precolonial Africa, was, then, at the stage of “pigmy 
property." The peasant family wove its own clothing; liakn 
tells us that each house had its own spinner. Obviously, the 
division of labor reflected by the caste system did not allow the 
manufacture of everything that was needed: all one could do 
was work in the craft allowed for his caste. For everything else, 
they had to turn to the open market, sometimes by barter, hut 
in general by actual purchase for money. This system which 


RCONOM It: ORGANIZATION 
149 
precluded competition with others in their professions con¬ 
stituted a true monopoly: each caste monopolized an eco¬ 
nomic activity, sanctified by tradition. The same frame of 
mind was to be found in the European corporations or guilds 
of the Middle Ages. I fowever, it seems that they had not gone 
so far as to form professional associations for the defense of 
group interests: the living tradition was amply sufficient to 
guarantee that. Therefore, no separation between domestic 
industry and agriculture, a separation prerequisite for the 
appearance of capitalism. 
We have seen that the term "property" implied different 
realities from Europe to Africa, where appropriation of tin- 
land was concerned. In Africa, it would be more precise to 
speak of use of the land, even in the so-called royal domains. 
The accent was placed rather upon the “human domain” of 
the king working these lauds; enumeration of the different 
families of captives was w hat expressed the wealth of a person¬ 
age. I he African king, however powerful, was easily per¬ 
suaded that the soil did not belong to him; this is especially 
applicable to emigrant kings: they easily accepted the sacred 
authority of the original occupants, even if the latter were 
presently without any material power. This explains the defer¬ 
ence of the powerful king of the Macina to one of the local 
princes of the Mima region, the Tukifiri-soma. 
Before him, the king of the Nldcina had to remain stand¬ 
ing, cover himself with dust while swearing fidelity 10 him, and 
remove his hoiihou to drape himself in it; . . . The tide of this 
prince has survived to tins day, but the one who now bears it 
has fallen from power and can only walk, having no steed; his 
authority has vanished, but his title remains ... I he king of the 
Macina still goes to visit this personage, asserting that this 
brings him good luck; he consults him and asks him to pray for 
him; he dismounts to salute him and visits him at the place 
where his ruined capital used to be.1-* 
Ibis singular personage so described is the former sov- 
ercign, still the master of the soil, in the ritual sense of that 


'50 
P RF. COLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
term; lie is the one who allots lands to newcomers, without 
first consulting the king. He has received the land in trust; he 
never sells it—lie would not dare to do so for religious rea¬ 
sons—he allots only the use of it. The sale of land, properly 
speaking, seems to have been unknown in traditional pre- 
colonial Africa, To grasp the historical peculiarities of the 
country, one would have to imagine a victorious Julius Caesar 
showing similar deference to Vercingetorix, the vanquished 
autochthonous prince, the original occupant of the land. We 
might go even further and observe that, in truth, the problem 
of land ownership appears never to have existed in Africa. 
Instead of land having constituted a wealth beyond the reach 
of certain social categories, it was within everyone’s grasp, with 
no need to forfeit one’s freedom, like the serf bound to the 
soil, in order to make use of it, to “possess” it. The slave had 
his own patch of ground; the stranger who just this morning 
came to the village would also get his. Expropriation of the 
sort seen in sixteenth-century Europe was unthinkable in the 
history of precolonial Africa. Perhaps, it was the vast expanse 
of arable lands that shielded Africa from this social problem. 
So Africa never had the rural capitalist who was the farm- 
owner acting as intermediary between tile true owner ot the 
soil and the expropriated agricultural wage-earner. 
NAVTTANISM 
The category of peasants called navet&nes in Wolof do 
not constitute a class: its members do not know' one another, 
are not bound by any traditional group solidarity; they are 
mobile because, in the main, they are young bachelors who go 
away to look for work so as to accumulate a dowry with which 
they can return to marry in their villages and settle down 
permanently. Navetanism is thus a transitional stage in the life 
of a young man: he goes away with the permanent intention of 
one day returning home. He is no man’s slave, no contract 
I 


ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION 
15 I 
could permanently bind him to the land of any lord. The root 
of the word in Wolof means, literally, “to spend the winter,” 
i.c., the “rainy season”; contracts automatically end with that 
season and arc renewable only by agreement. 
Drought and progressive exhaustion of the soil are the 
principal reasons impelling young men of a particular village 
to spend the rainy season in a region with more water, not yet 
exhausted by cultivation, in a word, better endowed by nature. 
Since the desert is creeping into Black Africa from north to 
south above the Equator, these peregrinations follow the same 
direction. It was drought which brought about the dispersion 
of the inhabitants of the former capital of Ghana and the 
entire region of the Ouagadou. It also caused the successive 
retreats on the left bank of the Senegal River. Many of the 
people of the Djumhii! and Gayor regions, today half desert, 
withdrew toward the Baol, while the inhabitants of that area, 
especially the peasants, went off in the direction of Sine Sa¬ 
lting the British Gambia, and Casamancc, all regions located 
farther south and decidedly more humid. Only the powerful 
attraction of Dakar’s economic pole was able to swing this 
tide westward, insofar as Senegal is concerned, The peasants 
who thus escaped the hard and monotonous seasonal rhythm 
of local economic life, ended up by settling in the suburbs of 
tiat city, although that was not their original intention: they 
ad come with the idea of returning home as usual. Once 
settled there, under the changed living conditions, they gradu¬ 
ally lost their peasant attitudes as they found work at the 
oc s or in various urban industries, and this finally made 
t em aware of the fact that they were workers. Thus, a phe¬ 
nomenon of growing proletarianization. 
THE TAALIBfi 
l id' 1 SCt irnn^ °l die taaltbe (the believer) in the Murid, 
ane> iinc* ot,icr communities carried no seed of social 


PRECO I.ONI A L BLACK AFRICA 
I 52 
upheaval, for the believer was nor bound to rhe marabout 
against his will. He had voluntarily submitted himself so as to 
enter Paradise in which he believed; he could at any time 
break the spiritual bond tying him to the marabout. This 
relatively rare act of disaffiliation was called, in Wolof, mulct. 
I he body of such believers were grouped in the community 
(Data), in which all the means of production were concen¬ 
trated. The believer shunned possessions. He felt that his own 
power to work (apparently the only thing left to him) did not 
belong to him: it was in the service of the marabout with 
whom he had made a metaphysical contract assuring him a 
dace in Paradise after death. Thus, even the precolonial mar¬ 
about system could not lead to social revolutions, because the 
believer was unaware that he was expropriated and exploited. 
SLAVE MANPOWER: CONCENTRATION 
I he end of rhe Middle Ages and the whole of the Renais¬ 
sance in Europe were characterized by a degree of slavery as 
intense as and more detestable than what Africa had known. 
1 his will become clearer by what is to follow. It is customary 
to consider slavery as a specifically African phenomenon, but 
we have just seen that until the end of the aforementioned 
period white men were in the habit of reducing their own 
fellows to slavery. The serf of the Middle Ages was as totally in 
thrall as the African slave (Fustel tie Coulanges referred to him 
as the rustic slave). So, this institution was characteristic of all 
mankind, regardless of color. It is erroneous to believe that 
European slavery, especially in modern times, was but an 
exceptional and fragmentary social phenomenon. After its 
contact with Africa, sixteenth-century Europe progressively 
lost the custom of internal slavery' and, taking advantage of its 
superiority in arms, substituted Black slavery. After the con¬ 
tact with Europe, the lot of Africa’s slaves suddenly got worse, 


ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION 
153 
since it then became possible for them to be sold to persons 
who would export them, with the whole chain of well-known 
evils entailed in these forced crossings. 
Slavery is certainly the great chink in African social or¬ 
ganization; but the documents available prove that the African 
slaves who were not deported in general enjoyed living condi¬ 
tions incomparably superior to those of white slaves in Eu¬ 
rope. Slaves of the kings of Mali and the Askias of Gao enjoyed 
complete liberty of movement. Thus, an ordinary slave of the 
Askia Daud, a native of Kanta, was able to carry' out a pil¬ 
grimage to Mecca without his master’s knowledge; on his 
return, instead of listening to the hypocritical words of his 
uandu (herald), who tried to incite him against the slave, the 
king pardoned him along with a hundred members of his 
tribe.^ The Diam-Uali, Diam-Tene, and Sorobanna tribes, 
while being slaves of the Askia, occupied a whole territory 
whose soil they cultivated tor their own account, giving only a 
predetermined share of their crops to the sovereign. When the 
latter made a present of them to an erudite Muslim named 
Mohammed Tide, they remained on their lands unhindered: 
their life in no way changed and their new master, according 
to tradition, merely went on getting the same share of the 
crops from them.16 
When Askia Mohammed defeated Sonni Baro Dau, the 
son of Sonni Ali, he took over some twenty-four slave tribes 
that belonged to him. Fhe /arikh el Fettach gives details 
about the social life of these tribes and, in particular, the 
system of shares which was applicable to them. Before belong¬ 
ing to the Songhai, they too had first been the property of the 
'ng of Mali; starting only with Sonni Madogo did they 
c angc imperial masters. The first three tribes were of Bam- 
^ ara origin and had most likely not yet been converted to 
,s ani> ** Kati is to be believed; in other words, the slave might 
_c a religion other than that of his master. The king of Mali 
ected his domestic servants from among them. When one of 


*54 
PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
the men wished to marry, the king would furnish a dowry of 
forty thousand cowries 
to the parents-in-law of the groom, so as to prevent the wife or 
children from claiming their freedom, and in order to make sure 
that they and their progeny would always remain the property 
of the Mai!i-koi. . . In the days of the Malli-kois, and ever since 
these tribes first belonged to them, they had been obligated to 
pay an annual tribute of forty cubits [of cultivated land] per 
couple, man and wife; thus it was until the time these tribes 
were handed over to the chis.*7 
With these crops the king fed his army; if they were insuffi¬ 
cient or of poor quality, a new compensatory tax was levied 
upon the tribes for having been responsible for bad agri¬ 
cultural management. Under Askia Mohammed, however, the 
shares taken became more reasonable, more humane; they 
were collected in the following manner: a graduated tax, in 
kind, was levied on each couple at harvest time. After having 
appraised the holdings of each family, the king’s tax-collector 
would take ten measures of flour from any who could supply 
only that much, twenty horn those who could supply no 
more, and thirty from all others, even if they were capable of 
providing a thousand. This limit, indeed, was never to he 
exceeded, however much individual wealth the slave might 
have. A dark shadow clouds this almost too beautiful picture: 
the Askia bartered some of the tribe’s children for horses. 
The fourth tribe, the lyindiketas, were dispersed from 
Gao as far as Sibiridugu. No one tried to stop the peregrina¬ 
tions of these people; when the Askia met one of them along 
his way, at a strongpoint or in a village, he could tell only by 
the individual’s ethnic name that he was one of his slaves. He 
might then do with him whatever he wished. From the period 
of Mali until that of Gao, the only kind of tax imposed on this 
tribe was to supply the feed necessary for the king’s horses; 
the hostlers were furnished by it as well, and the adults built 
the boats needed to transport the hay, at least during the reign 
J 


F. C O N O MIC ORGANIZATION 
r 5 5 
of the Askias. I he tax thus assumed an increasingly functional 
character: one’s occupation or economic status was the basis 
for the tax imposed on him. 
The Zendji (the fifth tribe, extending from Kama to 
Sibiridugu), who lived by fishing, paid their tax in dried fish 
when the water was low: it ranged from one to ten parcels of 
dried fish, according to the means. The ten-packet maximum 
was never to be exceeded. This tribe also supplied the boats 
and crews needed for certain types of transportation. The 
sixth tribe, the Arbis, were exempt from the levy since, under 
the Askias, it was from them that all the domestic servants and 
confidential special emissaries came. The women served the 
king’s wives, while the youth escorted the king on Ins peace¬ 
able or warring outings. The seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, and 
eleventh tribes were blacksmiths of foreign extraction, Their 
male ancestor had been the blacksmith slave of a Christian 
master living somewhere on an island in the Atlantic: one of 
the Canaries or Cape Verde Islands? We do nor know. At any 
rate, this slave was said to have escaped and taken refuge in 
Kukiya, under the reign of Sonni Mohammed Fan. We have 
noted that, in general, men of the castes could not be taken as 
slaves, If that rule was broken, it was perhaps because the 
individual in question was of foreign extraction. He had come 
into the country already a slave. However that may be, his 
descendants, instead of being concentrated in one place, were 
dispersed so as to avoid any coalition among them. Kati 
observes that these aliens followed filiation through the pater¬ 
nal line, contrary to African customs. The taxes imposed from 
time immemorial on these five tribes amounted to “one hun- 
red spears and one hundred arrows per family each year.’’ 
The twelfth tribe occupied the territory betwen Gao and 
rani. 
According to Kati, the Askia Daud had plantations 
t roughout the land, from the Erei, the Dendi, the Kulane, 
c estimates the total annual crop at four thousand sacks 


156 PRF.COLONIA L BLAC;K AFRICA 
of gram, which by present-day calculations does not seem a 
great deal, The work on these plantations was carefully orga¬ 
nized, and done by slaves. Each plantation was managed by a 
fan fa, who might have under him one hundred, sixty, fifty, 
forty, or twenty slaves; the name means both slave-master and 
ship's master. 
The plantation of Abda, in the Dendi territory, employed 
two hundred slaves with four fanfas, ali under another head 
named, Missakulallah; it yielded one thousand status of rice: 
status were leather sacks holding about 250 liters. Seed and 
sacks were supplied by the Askia. Ten boats were used to 
transport the cereals. At harvest time, the agent sent to collect 
it brought from the Askia to the head fanfa, according to 
custom, one whole block of salt, a thousand kola nuts, and a 
black bonbon and a black loincloth for his wife. The personal 
wealth of this head fanfa, who was nonetheless a slave, could 
easily exceed in cereals alone a thousand sunus. His situation 
was thus in no way comparable to that of a member of the 
plebs of antiquity or a serf of the Middle Ages bound to the 
soil. 
Such agricultural wealth was stored in clay granaries used 
for purposes of silage. It sometimes happened that such a 
plantation, with all those working on it, was given as a present 
to a Shcrif, a scholar, or any other friend of the king. This is 
how the plantation of Djangadja was given to the alfa Kati, a 
native scholar: the crops then went to a new master, but the 
social situation of the workers remained unchanged. 
One institution of Askia Hand's seems to indicate that the 
soldiers must have been mostly of slave origin : 
It was he who inaugurated the system under which die 
king was heir to all his soldiers’ goods, because, he said, they 
were his slaves; before that, it had not been so, and the king 
inherited only the soldier’s horse, shield, and javelins, nothing 
else. As for the custom the kings had of taking the daughters ol 
their soldiers and using them for their own pleasure, it was a 
deplorable custom which existed before his reign,™ 
j 


ECONO M I C O R c; AN I 7. AT I O N 
1 57 
A treed slave was entitled to a deed ot manumission 
drawn up in proper legal form. This was the case of an old 
woman who was part of the legacy of the diango Mussa 
Sagansaro, who, according to Kati, was freed by Askia 
DmdP 
ft The facts mentioned in this chapter constitute additional 
information on the organization of civil administration and 
labor; one can see in general how taxes must have been levied. 
The social condition of the slaves has been clearly shown: 
their treatment was not inhumane, for the period, as long as 
they remained within the area; they were, more and more, sort 
of “subjects” of the king. Their misfortune lay in the awful and 
hateful fact that they might at any moment be sold. From that 
viewpoint, their situation was identical with that of the white 
European slave of the same period. Beyond that, they were 
better off, as we have just shown. 
retribaijzation 
We can see at work here the characteristically African 
phenomenon of apparent retribalization. Kati tells us the eth¬ 
nic family names of the first slaves who were the originators of 
the twenty-four tribes belonging to the emperors of Mali and 
Gao; they were ordinary individuals whom the sovereign al- 
owed to found a house which would proliferate in geometric 
progression through the generations. These large families, 
which numbered thousands of members after a short while, 
a all the external appearances of a clan or tribe, as to 
number, identity of name, and collateral relationships. Yet 
uy totally lacked the social structure and organization of the 
^an. Their members were merely a juxtaposition of individu- 
^ mtegrated into an already highly developed monarchic 
^ were at most only conscious of their degree of 
ns “trough the ethnic names appearing in the census. 


158 PRF.COLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
PRIMITIVE ACCUMUL.ATION 
We now have a general idea of the productive forces, the 
means of production, accumulation, and disposal, and whom 
they belonged to. There was not, on the one hand, a social 
minority possessing these means and accumulating them in a 
few shops and, on the other hand, a mass of expropriated 
persons forced to sell their labor power to this minority in 
order to live. According to the later analyses of Marx and 
Engels, Africa was thus at the stage of “natural economy,” 
characterized by the production of only what is barely neces¬ 
sary for existence. Such an economy is an obstacle to the 
appearance of capitalism. However, on examining things more 
closely, we see that it was not exactly that way; in the mar¬ 
ketplaces of Timbuktu, Djenne, and elsewhere, there were 
people producing with the sole purpose of resale; and, as Rosa 
Luxembourg points out, this is tire main condition for the 
appearance of capitalism. Nevertheless, if one considers the 
duration of this period of “natural economy" in Africa, one 
must realize that the process of “primitive accumulation," that 
is, the separation of labor and the conditions of labor, took 
place there at the slow pace of a secondary chemical reaction 
thoroughly negligible when compared to the principal reac¬ 
tion. It seems that it was the African collectivism described in 
the preceding chapter, the moral and material security it as¬ 
sured every individual, which made useless, if not superfluous, 
the accumulation of excessive wealth; even the ricites of the 
king do not seem huge by modern standards. Hoarding, 
usury, and all forms of excessive concentration of individual 
wealth are only the reflection of social anxiety, uncertainty 
about tomorrow, a sort of shield for oneself and one’s kin 
against a cruel fate, It is in an individualistic society that we 
see the great growth of such a phenomenon: this was true of 
the West throughout its history. Indo-Aryan individualism, 
dating from earliest antiquity, and the feeling of social msecur- 


ECIONOM IC ORGAN I Z AT I ON 
T59 
it)' inherent in it, developed the spirit of struggle for life more 
than anywhere else. When the history of societies is written, it 
will be seen that, from the Aegean period to our own day, that 
of the Europeans was the hardest, roughest, least clement for 
the individual who was forced, condemned to a constant 
struggle, lest he disappear. Of course, the struggle for life is a 
law of nature, but it applies there more than anywhere else. 
Without any margin of safety, one whose means give out sinks 
before the indifferent eyes of others. This social coldness ex¬ 
tends far beyond the period of modern capitalism to cover the 
history of Europe from the time of Athens until today. No 
politico-social education has so far radically changed the 
Occidental mind in this respect. The technical and intellectual 
progress due to constant and necessary busyness, the energy 
with which one must imperturably amass ever more wealth, 
the peculiar forms that these activities assume and their reper¬ 
cussion upon the social order, tiic development of mercan¬ 
tilism all these seem to flow, in large part, from one same 
initial principle. Even a certain love of risk results from this 
necessity: in order to escape from slavery in Europe, as wc have 
seen, one had to have a remunerative means of support; the 
same social reason accounted for the search for an inheritance 
or credit so as to set up as a farmer-employer in the country or 
commission a ship and try one’s luck on the high seas. The 
tise and development of maritime commerce remained, for a 
very long time, a private business, before being taken over by 
the various European countries. 
iTom Homer’s day to our own, through Athens, Rome, 
ant the Middle Ages, ii would he difficult to find a period 
ir ^ (r ^roPer^ natural1 economy, t he mercantilism inher- 
^ om the Cretans and Phoenicians has gone on and grown 
stronger, except for a few moments of decline. Two factors 
appear to have stimulated commerce: the small size and, 
^ pccia |yt the comparative poverty of the mother country, on 
land, and on the other, a certain numerical weakness of 


PRECGLON1AL BLACK AFRICA 
160 
the population which eliminated all hope df achieving fortune 
hy force of arms, by the conquest of other countries. Commer¬ 
cial activity often seems the form of economic adaptation of 
minorities. Such was the case with the Phoenicians, beside the 
powerful Egyptian nation; such was also the case for Genoa 
and Venice until the destruction of Constantinople hy 
Mohammed II; and the Lebano-Syrians and Israelites in our 
times; such would seem to have been the case for certain Black 
African groups, such as the Djula, among others. The com¬ 
mercial activity of Athens must have been stimulated by the 
geographic context and the poverty of Greece. Numerous and 
powerful peoples living in underendowed regions, such as the 
Germanic, throughout history have been conquerors. In mod¬ 
ern times, with such universal and pact fistic minds as Goethe, 
the Germanic drive from north to south took on a literary 
turn: “Kennst du das Land wo die Zitronen bluehn?” (Do 
you know he land where the lemon-trees bloom?)40 To the 
extent that African collectivism and European individualism 
grow out of the material conditions of existence, the preceding 
considerations are founded upon a objective basis. 
N O T E S 
«. Sec position of Kaarta on map, pp. i $8-139. 
1. Skli, T.S., XXXV, 387. 
5. I he last two of these were in Senegal (Cayor). 
6. 
7- 
10. 
1 L. 
I 2. 
I4. 
j 6. 
17- 
Sec quotations from Ibn Battuta, 
Sadi, FX, V, 24, H. See p. Ss above. 9. Al Bakri, op. cit. 
K,lti, T.K, XVI, 319, and Sadi, TX, XXXI, 33H. 
Idrissi geographe, op. at„ veil, I, p. iS. 
At Bakri, op. at,, p. 340. 1 3, Kati, T.F., XI, 177, 
AI Bakri, op, at., pp. 324-326. 15. Sadi, TXt XXXk 338. 
Ibn Haukal, Of Roads ami Kingdoms. 
M.A. Jaspan, ‘Negro C iihure in Southern Africa Before European 
Conquest,” Science and Society, voL XIX, no, 3, Summer 1955* 
PP* 193-1f 8* translated by Thomas Diop as “La Culture Noire cn 
Afrique du Sud avant la conquetc europeenne/ Presence Africaine, no* 
XVIII-XIX, February-May 1958, pp, 143-165, 


ECON omic organization 
161 
f 8. Kati, Tip*! XVI, ^ zo, 19, AI Bakri, opt ctt.f pp. 324—327, 
to* Ibn Battuta, op. at., p. 14. 21. See map, p. 
i2. Kati, T.F,t IV, 77. 13. Sadi, TS.3 V, 24-25. 24. Katt, T.K, 
XIV, 262. 
25. Sadi* TS., XXXI, 338. 
26. Karl Marx, (Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, traits, by Samuel 
Moore and Edward Avdmg, ed, by Frederick Engels, reviewed and 
amplified according to the Fourth German Edition by Ernest Lin ter- 
inarm (Chicago: Kerr, 1915), VoL 1, Part VIII, eh. XXVIII, p, 750, 
quoting William Harrison’s “Description of England, prefixed to Hob 
in shed’s Chronicle*1 (1577). 
27- Idem,, p. 806. 28. Ibid. 29, Idem., pp. 806-807, 
30- Ibid.* in, p, 808, quoting Styne s Annals of the Reformation find 
Establishment of Religion, and other Various Occurrences in the 
Church of LHghtttd during Queen Elizabeth s Happy Reign, Second 
cd,f 1725, voL 2. 
} 1 ■ Marx, op. at, p* 80 8, 3 2. Idem., XXXII, 835, 33, Idem.(loc. 
cit. 
34. Kiti, T.F., V, 81. 35. Idem., XI, 204-207, 36, Idem., 1, 52- 
53- 
37- Idem., V, 108, 38. Idem., XI, 211. 39, Idem., XI, 192—193, 
40. Goethe, Wilhelm Masters Lebrjahre, 111, 1, 


Chapter Seven 
IDEOLOGICAL SUPERSTRUCTURE: 
ISLAM IN BLACK AFRICA 
Analysis of the conditions in which Islam succeeded in Africa 
will lead us to see the part it also played in civilizing the 
country. 
Only during the Altnoravidc movement of the first half of 
the eleventh century did some white people, Berbers, attempt 
to impose Islam on Black Africa by force of arms. Yahia hen 
Ibrahim, head of the Lemtuna and Djoddala tribes, which 
respectively occupy the regions of Mauritanian lagant and 
Adrar, was the originator of that movement. On his return 
from Mecca, around 1035, he brought a preacher, Abdallah 
ben Yasin, to convert the members of the tribes under his 
jurisdiction. The first result was total failure. The preacher was 
on the point of leaving, when Yahia succeeded in convincing 
him it was a good idea for the two of them to take a retreat in 
a fortified monastery, on an island at the mouth of the Senegal 
River, and lead an ascetic life, which through their example 
might attract some disciples. This was the beginning of the 
Marabout movement in West Africa (“marabout,” from the 
Arabic el Morabbatm, meaning “living in a monastery 
“Almoravide” in turn derives, by alteration, from el Morah- 
bathu According to Ibn Khaldun, when the number of disci¬ 
ples had reached one thousand, Yassin said to them; 
A thousand men cannot easily be beaten; therefore must vu 
now work at remaining steadfast in holding to the truth and 
forcing, if need be, everyone to recognize it. Let us leave tins 
place and fulfill the task imposed upon usd 
i6i 


1DEOLOGICAL SU I’ERSTRUCTURE 
I 63 
PKACEFUI. !>ENF.TRAl l ON 
Ihc Almoravides besieged Aoudaghast and Ghana. This 
was the only time white troops attempted to impose Islam 
through violence. 
One of Vasin’s disciples, King Uardiabi, converted part of 
the Tuculor on the Senegal River: they became zealous allies 
of the Arabo-Rerbcrs in the holy wars, from the eleventh 
century on. 
The Almoravide thrust pushed northward across the des¬ 
ert, through Sijilmasa and the Maghreb, to reach part of 
Spain. It did not spread, in West Africa, to the east and south: 
conversion of these regions was to he the work of autoch¬ 
thonous marabouts. 
The primary reason for the success of Islam in Black 
Africa, with one exception, consequently stems from the fact 
that it was propagated peacefully at first by solitary Arabo- 
Berber travelers to certain Black kings and notables, who then 
spread it about them to those under their jurisdiction. This 
Was the case, according to Bakri, with the king of Mali, whom 
he calls El Mussulman:, and who must have been none other 
than the Mandingo king Baratnendana Kcita (1050) of whom 
Khaldun speaks. A Mohammedan traveler abided for a long 
time with him when drought swept the land; legend has it that 
he caused it to rain by his prayers. The king, who took this to 
he a miracle, then converted to the new religion. What is to he 
emphasized here is the peaceful nature of this conversion, 
regardless of the legend surrounding it. 
the role oe autochthonous chiefs 
I he second period of Islamization was marked by the 
conversion of the people, whether through automatic imita* 
non of their chiefs, or through some violent action of these 
refs, sometimes going beyond their borders and becoming 


I 64 PREt-Ol.ONI A l, BLACK AFRICA 
veritable holy wars: all such holy wars were conducted try 
Black chiefs. The king of the town of Silla, in the eleventh 
century, was already waging holy war against the inhabitants 
of Kalenfu,2 as had Askia Mohammed against the Mossi 
emperor Nasere, Aniadu Sheiku against the Darnel of Cayor, 
and Lat Dior Diop against Koki in 1875. 
Ousman Dan Fodio (180:1). Id Hadj-Omar (1850), and 
Ahmadu Ahmadu (1884) were the great religious conquerors 
of the Sudan in the nineteenth century. 
With the Sultan of Djenne, Konboro, we witness the 
phenomenon of automatic imitation of the sovereign by the 
people; they adopted the faith of Islam immediately following 
the conversion of the king. The larikh l>$ Sudan places this 
event in the sixth century of the Hegira (twelfth century).’ 
Sadi fails to mention the name of the Muslim scholar who 
must have exerted a religious influence on the king of Djenne: 
but the fact seems undeniable; when he decided to change his 
religion, he summoned all the Ulemas living in the country, 
and renounced the traditional faith in their presence. This 
instance substantiates the ideas already expressed. I hese Ul¬ 
emas, these solitary marabouts, not only were unable to un¬ 
dertake any military action to convert their sovereigns, but 
absolutely needed their protection and the good will of pol¬ 
itico-social circles, to live safely in the land during the transi¬ 
tional period before the conversion of the king. 
Such royal conversions were, moreover, taken amiss by 
the people and all of the sovereign's prestige was needed tor 
them to be accepted. It occasionally happened that a con¬ 
verted king concealed his new religious convictions from his 
people as long as possible. This was the case with Kan-Mer, 
the son of Bcssi, who ruled the town of Aluken, near Gao, a' 
Bakri’s day.4 
The special character of conversions effected by national 
chiefs is that the latter, however ruthless their methods, could 
never have been considered, in the eyes of the people, as 


IDEOLOCICA L SUPERSTRUCTURE 
165 
foreign oppressors or os being in league with such. Impossible 
as it was for the people to see El Hadj-Omar and the others as 
agents of a colonizing power, just so inevitably did the mis¬ 
sionaries see them in this light. 
M ETAPHYSICAL REASONS 
A third cause for the success of Islam in Africa seems to 
reside in a certain metaphysical relationship between African 
beliefs and the “Muslim tradition.” In the latter there is to be 
found an invisible world, a doppclganger of the visible one; it 
is indeed an exact replica of it, but the initiate alone can see it. 
Askia Mohammed, in carrying out his pilgrimage to Mecca, 
having come back by way of Egypt, pitched camp not far from 
Cairo for the night. He was accompanied at that time, among 
other scholars, by one Salih Diawara; the latter was able to 
“sec” and shake hands with the Muslim genie, Chamharuch. 
According to the “Islamic tradition” related to Kati, this was a 
beneficent genie whose followers were like marabouts and 
made pilgrimages like them, Around him, there were some 
freed genies, for in that spirit world there are also slaves, some 
good and some evil. The malevolent, pagan genies, just like 
their Counterparts in our visible world, go to Hell when they 
die: they spend their time in tormenting us,s In 1928, follow¬ 
ing the death of Amadu Bamba, originator of the Moham¬ 
medan sect of the Murides, a great wind swept the region of 
his capital, Djurdcl, for an entire day. It was blowing toward 
the sea, and it was spontaneously concluded that this was the 
genie who had accompanied die holy man during his exile in 
Gabon, now returning to the ocean. Everyone was convinced 
mat, during his life, this genie never left his side, acting in a 
as his rampart against all evil. This metaphysical being is 
n°t to be confused with a guardian angel. 
It goes without saying diat this conception of a dual 


i 66 
PRECOI.ONIAI, BLACK AFRICA 
world is to be found, in various forms, in the beliefs of 
Africans to such a point they they fed completely comfortable 
in Islam. Some of them do not even feel they have changed 
their metaphysical horizon. That is what led Dan Fodio to 
criticize severely all those who, though calling themselves 
Muslims, continue such practices as libations, offerings, di¬ 
vination, the Kabbala, etc., and even write verses from the 
Koran in the blood of sacrificial animals.6 Dan Fodio’s text, 
although rather recent (nineteenth century), reflects a ten¬ 
dency already imperative in the days of the Askias (fifteenth- 
seventeenth centuries). African religions, more or less forgot¬ 
ten, were in the process of atrophying and being emptied of 
their spiritual content, their former deep metaphysics. The 
jumble of empty forms they had left behind could not compete 
with Islam on the moral or rational level. And it was on that 
latter level of rationality that the victory of Islam was most 
striking. I hat was the fourth cause of its success. 
I he imperative need for rationality reflected in the writ¬ 
ings of Dan Fodio was henceforth better satisfied by Islam 
than by the dying traditional faiths. Nevertheless, it must be 
noted that, in the domain of artistic creativity, the Islamizcd 
African underwent, for a long time, a throttling, a kind of 
cultural impoverishment. During the initial years of Moham¬ 
medanism strict formalism was needed, so as to check any 
return to idolatry through the devices of artistic representa¬ 
tion. It will he recalled under what conditions Islam tri¬ 
umphed over Sabaism. I hereforc, it was necessary to 
proscribe for centuries any representation in animal form, and 
even more so, in human form. The notion of God, especially, 
was one which might not be concretized by means of art. 
Exegetes of Islam may realize today that this phase of fears is 
considered historically outgrown within the framework of the 
evolution of Muslim consciousness. It is unthinkable that the 
renaissance of sculptural and pictorial art (featuring the 
human form) might entail an offensive return to idolatry in 
any Muslim country. 


IDEOLOGICAL SUPERSTR U CfU R E 
167 
POWER OF RELIGIOUS BELIEFS 
What was the strength of religious belief in precolonial 
Islamic Africa, its political and social role, the imprint it left? 
In the Sudan, the reign of Askia Mohammed was a 
watershed. Before him it seems, to a certain degree at least, the 
Islamism of the emperors of Gao was rather fragile; with the 
last two of these, if we are to believe Kati, there was un¬ 
disguised hostility. Askia Mohammed was only the lieutenant 
of Sonni Ali, whose faith was very lukewarm; his son. Biro, 
who replaced him, refused to embrace Islam. Mohammed 
became a dissident and insistently urged Haro to convert. 
Following negotiations which lasted fifty-two days, and were 
conducted in large part by the scholar Salih Diawara, already 
allied with the future Askia, the two went into battle. Baro 
stood firm: there was no question of his embracing Islam; in 
this, he went farther than his father who had apparently been 
converted. The battle ended with his defeat. Kati considers 
that God thus assured the Askia’s victory over the infidel, 
which is quite reminiscent of the episode mentioned in La 
Chanson de Roland: Charlemagne, the Christian emperior, 
emerged victorious over the “Saracens” at Roncesvalles be¬ 
cause the swords of his men, especially that of Roland, were 
guided by the Angel Gabriel. From the Christian viewpoint, 
this was a victory- of Light over Darkness.7 
Islam was, and remains in large part, a living religion in 
Black Africa, in contrast to the Christianity of the West, which 
tends to become among Europeans a mere religious custom. 
e Askias included the Ulemas in all their imperial deci¬ 
sions: 
After Salih Diawara had informed the Askia of what he 
witnessed at His interview with chi Baro, the prince called 
together his council, made up of the Ulemas, the notables, and 
1 chiefs of his army, and consulted them as to the course of 
action he should pursue.8 


i 68 
P KE CO LON1A L BLACK A FR I CA 
Islam practically ran the government under Askia 
Mohammed. Cadi Mahmud did not hesitate to dismiss the 
envoys of the Askia and purely and simply refuse to obey hi^ 
orders. Not only did this do him no harm, but he was able to 
address the Askia as follows (using the familiar "“thou” form ;: 
\ lave you forgotten, or do you pretend to have forgotten, 
the day you came to see me at my home, and you seized my foot 
and my clothing, saying: “M have come to place myself under 
your protection and entrust to you my person, so that you may 
save me from the flames of Hell; help me and hold me by the 
hand so that I may not to fall into Hell; 1 entrust myself to 
you"} That is the reason why 1 dismissed your envoys and 
d is obeyed you r or de r s,L| 
This action by which one entrusts his metaphysical lot, 
his fate in the hereafter, to a living saint, is characteristic of the 
marabout phase of Islam in West Africa. The marabouts are 
the living intermediaries between laymen and the Prophet, 
who is in direct communication with God. After death, the 
marabouts raise their disciples up to Paradise, carrying them 
on their shoulders past Purgatory (in Wolof: djegi jirat). It is 
while the saint is asleep that his soul, his double, leaves his 
body to go and carry out such missions of rescue. One can see 
the reason why even a king, like Askia Mohammed, would 
fee! it imperative to entrust himself to such a savior. So, in 
Black Africa to this very day, despite the formal doctrines of 
the Koran, there are no believers who dedicate themselves only 
to God and his Prophet; a third personage, the one known as 
his marabout, is needed by all laymen, from the masses up to 
the sovereign. 
The power of Islam was such that tt might have eliminated 
or attenuated slavery in the Middle Ages if it had decreed that 
the enslavement of one man by another was a mortal sin. But 
the Koran’s point of view on this question is shaded. One may 
have a slave under the following conditions: to begin with, if 
he is a prisoner of a holy war—but then he must be educated, 


IDEOLOGICAL SU PERSTRUCTURE 
169 
cared for, and converted; but, on the other hand, it is forbid¬ 
den to take as a slave a Muslim as well educated as oneself; so 
a slave must be freed as soon as he reaches the intellectual level 
of his master. 
Be that as it may, during the period under consideration, 
it is quite clear that it was the fear of Hell which kept the 
faithful within the moral discipline of religion. 
mystical underpinning of nationalism 
Islam has often been the mystical underpinning of Af¬ 
rican nationalism. This explains the fantastic epics of the 
Mahdi (1881), the national hero and liberator of the former 
Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, Rabah (1878), and the conquering 
liiculors oi the Senegal River and western Sudan. The wars of 
the Vlahdi, with their unusual character, deserve a little more 
attention. The Mahdi, according to Muslim tradition, is the 
Messiah, the Saviour who, before the end of the world, will 
bring the entire earth to Islam. Proclaiming himself such, one 
Mohammed-Ahmcd, a Sudanese by origin, galvanized his 
men, and succeeded in defeating Rashid-Bcy, the governor of 
Fashoda, In 1882., he defeated an Egyptian column and oc¬ 
cupied all the Kordofan: he completely massacred an army of 
ten thousand men commanded by Hicks Pasha. In 1885, 
Slatin Pasha, the British governor of Darfur, and Lupton-Bey 
(the British governor of Bahr-el-Ghazal, who affected Arab 
al|ascs as did the former) were also beaten by him. They 
capitulated in 1884.1 fe conquered the Berber country as well 
as the Sennar. On January z6, 1885, he entered the citadel of 
hartoum and there slew Gordon Pasha (Chinese Gordon). 
J&ht-tenths °* t^'e Sudanese territory had been reconquered 
fiOni the Anglo-Egyptian coalition opposing the Sudanese 
t^aC when he died.111 His victory was the more valiant in 
at t c victorious Sudanese had only bows and arrows while 


170 
PRE.CO LONIAI- BLACK AFRICA 
the Anglo-Egypdans were equipped with the most modern 
firearms available. The West was stupefied by the event, which 
brought a shout of admiration from Friedrich Engels. 
The victory of Amadu Shciku over Lat Dior, cited earlier, 
was due to just such causes: the Darnel of Cayor owed his 
salvation to the help of General Faidherbe whom he was able 
to get as an ally in this circumstance. The Tuculors, accom¬ 
panied by women, fought while singing hymns that had a 
profound effect on both the soldiers and their enemies, ac¬ 
cording to accounts I received from my maternal grand¬ 
mother: the Tuculors were fanaticized, the Cayorians terrified, 
The secular pseudo-nationalism of the latter, their mundane 
tieddo spirit, very quickly fell before tbe unshakable faith of 
the Tuculors, who, of course, were convinced they would go 
directly to Paradise when they died on the battlefield of this 
holy war. African nationalism among them had found an 
efficacious mystical underpinning. 
The difference between the extraordinary epic of Samory 
and that of the Mahdi consists in the fact that Samory, al¬ 
though a Muslim, acted without any mystical underpinning 
to his nationalism, as if he had weighed the consequences of 
it. He was able to crystallize the national resistance of almost 
all the territories of West Africa on a strictly secular basis 
without the assistance of any belief, idea, or foreign power to 
galvanize his troops. He did not wage holy wars as had Askia 
Mohammed or the religious leaders of the nineteenth century. 
He waged a national resistance of the very best “Vercingctorix 
type.” 
In his childhood, Samory lived in the circumstances of 
the masses as an African chieftain rarely had. This was what 
the originality of his political action and his glory were per¬ 
haps due to. 
Although of lesser magnitude, the resistance of Behanzim 
the last king of Dahomey (end of the nineteenth century), and 
that of Lat Dior (Senegal) were of the same type. As for Chaka, 


1 DIO LOGICAL SUPERSTRUCTURE 
177 
the Zulu chief, it will be necessary to make further studies to 
ascertain whether the English succeeded in channeling his 
“turbulence" inward, toward the other African clans and 
tribes, or whether lie was consciously making ready so that, 
when the time came, he might deal them a decisive blow. 
The fact was that due to the modus vivendi which was 
always respected, Chaka never waged war against the English 
in South Africa. On the other hand, the military and social 
organization with which he endowed his army and his people 
was the most technical and efficient of all those in Black Africa 
in modern times. It contributed mightily to the rapid and 
systematic fusion of the Zulu clans and tribes and the birth of 
the present-day nationalities in South Africa. 
Chaka's internal conquests were as rapid as they were 
extraordinarily farreacbmg. It is for all these reasons that he is 
sometimes referred to as the Napoleon of black Africa or at 
least of South Africa. 
Chaka never followed European examples. 
RENUNCIATION OF THE PRE-lSi.AMIC PAST 
Islam, in contrast to (present-day) Christianity, takes no 
account of the traditional past. The Christian West of today 
proudly recognizes its classical, pagan heritage, and does its 
utmost to preserve the works of that period. One discovers 
nothing of the sort in Islamized countries. The equivalent of 
tle Western pagan past must be hushed up, renounced, per¬ 
manently forgotten. A museum in Mecca filled with relics 
Gm the Sabaean period would be pure idolatry, an unthinka- 
e Initiative from the Muslim viewpoint. Reasons such as 
t esc explain why today the Blacks of Khartoum have a sense 
- s"amc at acknowledging their relationship to the ancient 
P®st of Meroe. I he ruins from that period, the eighty-four 
Pyramids still standing in the ancient capital, the temple of 


PRliCOl.OMAL BLACK AFRICA 
l 72 
Semna, Meroitic writing, the remains of the astronomical 
observatories, the vestiges of the metal industry which made 
the Sudan the Birmingham of antiquity, all this is of no 
interest because it is tainted with a pagan tradition no good 
Muslim would think of recalling. How could they, in all 
decency, hark back to these people who knew nothing of the 
Koran, and who did not pray as wc now do, to a time before 
religious wisdom? 
“sherifism” 
One might term as “Sherifism” the irresistible impulse on 
the part of most Muslim chiefs of Black Africa to link them¬ 
selves, by whatever sort of acrobatics, to the family tree of 
Mahomet. One of my uncles, Mahtar Lo, maintained until 
his dying day that twenty ancestors, whose names he would 
quote, linked him to the Prophet; anyone who disagreed with 
him was a heretic. This tendency spread throughout Africa 
after the introduction of Islam in the eighth century. All the 
royal families, without distinction, after 1st animation invented 
Sherihan origins for themselves, often retroactively adjusting 
local history. I his was the case of the royal branch of the Dias 
of Kukia, the former capital of Songhai, before Gao, until the 
eleventh century. An oral post-lslamic etymology has it that 
Dia derives from Dja Met1 el Yemen (“he came from Yemen”), 
ft seems there were two brothers, natives of Southern Arabia, 
who arrived in that region in “the most piteous state,” barely 
able to conceal their nakedness under “bits of animal hide.” 
Whenever they were asked where they came from, one of them 
would answer in Arabic with the aforementioned expression. 
Henceforth, that was the name of the elder of the two. After he 
defeated the fish known as Demon of the River, which was 
king of the region and periodically emerged from the water to 
dictate its laws, he supplanted it at the head of the nation and 
founded the Dia dynasty. 


[ DEOLOG1CAL SUPERSTRUCTURE 
*73 
Such legends have proliferated in Black Africa since Islam 
came m and have contributed to altering the authentic history 
of the continent.11 We find variants of them for the genesis of 
the first dynasties of Ghana, Bornu, Wadai, all of the Kor¬ 
ean, and so on. On the other hand, a migration starting 
from the Nile Valley seems beyond doubt to the extent that, 
even today, it can be substantiated by the ethnic names of the 
various clans.13 This migration, however, is mentioned no¬ 
where except in pre-lslaniic legends that gradually grow 
vaguer and vaguer, according to which, as noted by Dclafosse, 
the Blacks of West Africa relate their ancestors came from the 
east, from around the “Great Water." We will see that very 
probably this “Great Water" is the Nile rather than the Indian 
Ocean. 
Consciousness of the continuity of the people’s historical 
past lias been progressively weakened by religious influences. 
Even within our own families, we know that our parents prefer 
to forget systematically and keep their children unaware of a 
certain “pagan” past, which it has become indiscreet to men¬ 
tion, except for a few nostalgic reminiscences. In the search 
for ancestors as far away as Yemen, they might have been 
better off to stop at the Nile Basin, but this happens less and 
less often because, beginning with the seventh century, the 
history of that region appeared as if polluted by the image of 
the Pharaoh, the Bi blical curse on whom is perpetuated in 
Islam. 
However that may be, Mohammedan Black Africa in the 
Middle Ages was no less original than Christian Europe at the 
close of antiquity. Both continents were invaded in the same 
way by alien monotheistic religions which ended up being at 
the foundation of the entire sociopolitical organization, ruling 
philosophical thought, and carrying forward intellectual and 
WOral values during this whole period. 
A hierarchy as powerful, old, and permanent as that of 
e Christian Church is nonexistent in Islam; it is the replica, 
011 religious level, of the old Roman administrative organi- 


>74 
I’RECO LON IA L BLACK AFRICA 
zation. Immediately after the wars of the times of the first 
caliphates, there was coexistence and reciprocal tolerance 
among the different sects. None prevailed sufficiently to ht> 
able to anathematize the others and consider them schismatic, 
so as to erect a durable hierarchy upon its own concepts and 
its own interpretation of the religious texts. This situation gave 
rise in Black Africa to the possibility of a multiplicity of sects, 
Thus, alongisdc the old Titljane sect, native to North Africa 
and propagated by II Had) M a lick Sy in Senegal, there ap¬ 
peared at the beginning of the twentieth century, the new 
Muride sect created by Amadu Bamba. 1 he French authorities 
very quickly interpreted this as the integrating of Islam into 
local nationalism. Instead of expressly recommending a pil¬ 
grimage to Mecca, considering the material obligations one 
would have to fulfill vis-a-vis his family so as to be in a 
position to make such a journey, Muridism created shrines on 
the local level: Djurbcl, the residence of Amadu Bamba, with 
its mosque, was the substitute for Mecca during the mar¬ 
about’s life. After his death, it was shifted to (ouba, where he 
is buried. Thus, from 1900 to 19*5, no Muride made a 
pilgrimage to Mecca; the idea of making one occurred to no 
one, not even the creator of the sect. Cheikh Anta, the most 
independent of all the young brothers of Amadu Bamba, 
thought of making it only after Amadu Bamba’s death. 
To recapitulate, then, in the Middle Ages the religious 
superstructure played an equally important role in lairopc and 
in Africa. Christianity gave the West politico-administrative 
organization, and ensured the continuity of historical con¬ 
sciousness. Islam, in Black Africa, merely superimposed itself 
on the politico-administrative organization: even when, in 
consequence of the cosmopolitanism of the period, a foreigner 
(Arab or otherwise) was invested with a position by the sOV" 
ereign, he bore the indigenous title, 1 he sense of an ancient 
past was weakening but the Arab chroniclers noted the events 
of African history with praiseworthy objectivity: their writ- 


] IDEOLOGICAL SUPERSTRUCTURE 
175 
jugs today constitute a precious source of documentation. In 
Europe, as in Islamized Black Africa, the notion of the seven 
irts, that is, the trivium and the quadrivium, was carried 
forward, as we shall see in the following chapter. 
N OTE S 
I. Ibn Khaldun, op. at., II, p. 
A.I Bakri, op. at., pp. 114-3 1 \. 
3. Sadi, T.S., ch. V, p. 23. 
4, A1 Bakri,, op. at., p, 134. 
5, Kiti, T.F., ch. VI, pp. 113-116. 
6. Cheikh Otnirtnc Dan Fodio, Mottrel-Eiillhib {Algiers, i 898)* |\ 7 
{quoted in Lcnii-Goiirhan and Poirier, Ethnologic de I'Union fnui- 
qmet p. \$9l 
7. Kati, 7'I', ch* V, pp* 104-106, 
8. Idem., ch, V, p. 104, 
9, Idem., ch* VI, p, 117+ 
10, Delafosse, op* cit*, p. 113. 
II. Sadi, 7.,S., ch. I, pp* 4-8* 
12,, CL Chapter X below, 


1 
Chapter Eight 
INTELLECTUAL LEVEL: 
TEACHING AND EDUCATION 
THE UNIVERSITY 
As in the Western Middle Ages, reaching was in the hands 
of the clergy which, in the case of West Africa, was Moham¬ 
medan. Documents now at our disposal permit us to describe 
in detail the intellectual life of the university, particularly that 
of Sankorc, in Timbuktu. The student body was made up of 
all those who, regardless of age, were possessed of an insatia¬ 
ble thirst for knowledge. Today, it is difficult for us to picture 
the extent of this need among Africans of that period. The 
mosque was at one and the same time also the place of 
learning, the university. It was not an official building, but the 
religious undertaking of a devout cadi, apparently helped, in 
the beginning at least, by the people. Thus, Cadi HI Aquib 
restored the mosque built by Mohammed Naddi, the work 
being finished between July 16 and August 14, 1569. The 
Great Mosque of Timbuktu long remained unfi nished, vintil 
the Askia Daud, passing through the town, undertook to 
assist the cadi, saying to him: “What remains to he done, I 
shall take upon myself; it will he my share in this p|ulis 
endeavor.”1 
The schedule of courses lasted all day, interrupted only $ 
f rhe 
the times of prayers. Some scholars even taught tor part or u 
night. Immediately following prayers, the students g athciO 
around the professor, who imparted his teaching, com incut1 
176 
d 


1NTF.LI.ECTUA L LEVEL 
177 
upon the texts, and discussed them with the students. These 
Jofessots were not officially paid: they taught for the love of 
• idling; in return, rhey enjoyed immense respect and grati- 
ide from their pupils (learning the Koran) and their more 
jvanced students who, after mastering the Koran, went on to 
the various branches of Higher Education. On Wednesday, the 
j off from school, pupils and students each brought him 
some honorarium, for him to live on. According to Kati, in 
Timbuktu, there were 150 to 1K0 Koran schools, and a pro¬ 
fessor such as one Ali Takaria each Wednesday received ap¬ 
proximately 1715 cowries; each of his students brought him 
from five to ten cowries.2 The pupils of the Koran were also 
obliged to bring the wood for the fire around which the class 
met in the evening and at dawn. 
TEACHING METHOD 
The current teaching method was scholastic. The discus¬ 
sions carried on in those days about the texts might appear to 
us today as useless quibbling; such was not the case. The 
grammar method then in use, which consisted in making 
clear the grammatical significance of the text, was so revolu¬ 
tionary that for a long time it was considered suspect in 
Europe. The attempt to grasp the exact sense of a text and to 
''tick to it, whether one realized it or not, meant ridding it of 
lts mystical, revealed aspect, and reducing it to the dimensions 
(,f a profane vocabulary. Therefore, for a long time, many 
®Kgetist$ avoided applying such a method to the Bible, In 
1 r|ta> the language of Higher Education was Arabic, as was 
utln for Europe of the same period. The Koran was the 
^Utvalent of the Bible; it was the principal text to he studied, 
eone “Om which all others derived. It contained the sum of 
'fil that existed: past, present, future, the whole Universe. It 
s “His necessarily laconic and dense; so short a text to cover 


i7« 
PRECOLON ] AL BLAC K AFRICA 
SO 
w 
3 many things* The commentary, the learned exphnati 
'as thus imperative in the very first place. The place 
explication of the Koran within the educational programs " 
thus easily understood. 
THE PROGRAM 
But what actually was the program? Recollection of the 
Seven Arts never altogether vanished in Europe, but it was the 
Arabs who introduced the Aristotelian texts to it, well before 
the Crusaders’ contact with Byzantium. They introduced the 
same texts into Black Africa in the same period. The triviuni 
i.e., the study of grammar, Aristotelian logic (formal logic, 
grammatical logic), and rhetoric, was on the list of subjects 
taught, as shown in the Tarikh es Sudan. Chapter X of that 
work gives the biographies of seventeen scholars of Timbuktu, 
indicating all the subjects they had mastered. Almost all of 
them were dialecticians, rhetoricians, jurists, etc., who, in 
addition, had written works mentioned by title but for the 
most part not yet recovered. One of them, the famous Ahmed 
Baba, is said to have left more than seven hundred works. 
Each one of them had an immense library', also lost to us 
today. I he intellectual tradition was al ready well established 
at the time of Sadi (sixteenth century). About Mohammed Ben 
Mahmud, he writes: "He made a commentary of El Moghili’s 
poem in Redjez on logic. My father studied rhetoric and logic 
under him. He died in the month of Safar in 973 [September 
1565].^ 
Sadi himself studied all these subjects, and commented 
on several texts; he was the pupil of an inhabitant of l'm‘ 
buktu, a scholar of Uankori origin, by the name of Mohan1' 
med Ben Mahmud Ben Abu Bekr. 
In a word, lie was my professor, my master, and no one "as 
more useful to me, whether directly or through his writings ■ • ■ 


INTELLECTUAL LLVEt 
'79 
He awarded me graduate diplomas written in his own hand, 
covering the subjects he had taught according to his own or 
someone olse's methods. 1 sent him a certain number of my 
works; lie wrote on them annotations quite flattering to me; he 
even reproduced the results of some of my research and I heard 
him quote some of them in his lectures, thus displaying his 
impartiality, Iris modesty, and his respect for the truth in all 
circumstances. He was with us at the time of our misfortune.4 
AWARDING OF DIPLOMAS 
That text informs us of the existence of diplomas, the 
manner in which they were awarded (the same as that of 
Europe of the period), their individual character. A diploma 
was for a long time nothing more than a certificate of con¬ 
scientiously completed study. We can see here an aspect of the 
intellectual practices, with the mention of the works used as 
documentation, the existence of research activity. Thinking 
i k ^ 1 
thus, was a conscious activity; as such, it was becoming scicn* 
lific. 
INTELLECTUAL D EVE LOP M F, N T 
■ l” the Middle Ages, four centuries before Levy-Bruhl 
wrote his Primitive Mentality, Muslim Black Africa was al 
fcady commenting upon Aristotle's “formal logic” and prac- 
dialectics. Sadi mentions by name the dialectician EU 
qachatidi.5 Students came from all directions, all regions: 
^ this time, the city was full of Sudanese students, Wester- 
°CrSy m ardent pursuit of science and virtue.”6 
\lr ^ ^ quadrivium had also been introduced into Black 
^ lea by the same means at the same time. It did not develop 
( . c as as the rrivium. I he four disciplines constituting it 
P UietiCj geometry, astronomy, music) belong to the do- 


PRF.COJ.ON1AL BLACK AFRICA 
r8o 
main of science, of knowledge, which Muslims were led to 
neglect through a certain interpretation of the Koranic text. 
Since the latter covers everything, including the future, true 
science consisted in plumbing its depths; religion was the 
center of everything; all knowledge was merely secondary kyr 
the mind, whatever its practical value; such considerations 
held true for the entire Muslim world, Asian as well as Af¬ 
rican. In the seventh century, the Arabs, having inherited the 
learning of antiquity, were more advanced than the West in the 
exact sciences, which they, in large part, introduced into Eu- 
ropc. Bur whereas the West developed these sciences, the 
Arabo-African world merely remained where it was and even 
retrogressed in some areas. Islam made systematic develop¬ 
ment of the quadrivium superfluous: the "race ' of Arab math¬ 
ematicians, isolated researchers, progressively disappeared 
instead of fanning out. Europeans, on the other hand, were 
ahtul kitab, “those who believe in books, those of the books," 
those who believe that solutions to all profane problems are to 
be found in nature and systematically devote themselves to this 
relatively vain pursuit. 
This situation has continued to our own day. My pre¬ 
viously mentioned uncle boasted ot being one of the few to 
have some knowledge of astronomy, to he interested in this 
realm of knowledge, considered vain because not leading di¬ 
rectly to God. Yet, a certain kind of scholasticism sees every¬ 
thing deriving from the Divine Unity' and should thus have led 
to the justification and revalorization of science. In the Muride 
community, the school at Guede, a village in the Baol, under 
professor M'Backc Busso taught mathematics, applied me¬ 
chanics, some aspects of thermodynamics (steam engines), 
and especially the precise measurement of time, whatever the 
condition of the sky, this last activity being connected with the 
need to pray exactly on time, his school, in the 1930s, was 
well on the way to launching scientific research of the same 
quality as that which existed during the Renaissance, based 


INTELLECTUAL LEVEL 
T8 I 
exclusively on Arabic sources, without any direct influence 
from Europe. None of its members could either read or write 
French. Its astronomic knowledge was rather well developed 
because of the need to find the direction of Mecca by celestial 
observation, even beyond the familiar horizons. Yet, it would 
be erroneous to suppose that its general level reached that of a 
class in elementary mathematics. Only the scientific character, 
the quality of thinking at the Guede school deserves our 
attention. Bachiru M’Backe is today, in all probability, the 
marabout best versed in modern scientific movements. From 
our conversation in the summer of 1950,1 learned that atomic 
physics is not beyond his ken. Cheik M’Backe is by far the one 
among all of them most extraordinarily open to philosophical 
thought; his double access to both French and Arabic has even 
permitted him to become acquainted with Marxism. 
Among the Tidjanes, with whom I am less familiar, I 
believe Abdul Aziz, Ahmadu Sy, Mustafa Sy, Malik Sy, and the 
young Cheikh lidjane Sy arc best developed in the areas of 
knowledge. The structure of marabout society, its present-day 
customs and concerns are exactly the same as four hundred 
years ago, as the Tarikh es Sudan allows 11s to sec. 
The Sudanese scholars of the African “Middle Ages’’ 
were of the same intellectual quality as their Arab colleagues; 
at times, they were even better. Tims, Abderrahman-EI-Tcm- 
ini, a native of the Hcdjaz brought to Mali by Kankan Mussa, 
was able to discover; 
He sailed in Timbuktu and found 1 his city full of Sudanese 
legal experts. As soon as he realized that they knew more than 
be in legal matters, he left for Fez, devoted hintself to the study 
of the law there, then returned again to Timbuktu to settle 
here.7 
The books by Kati and Sadi prove that historical con¬ 
sciousness existed in a very definite way, with a feeling for 
dating events very precisely. Kati went even further and ex¬ 
pressed bis fear of passing errors on to posterity. The Tarikh es 


i S z 
PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
Sudan gives not only the year, month, and day, but even the 
hour whenever possible. Upon verification these dates turned 
out to he exact in almost all cases. It was customary to work 
from documents, to quote earlier or contemporary authors, to 
build oneself immense libraries at the cost of sacrificing all 
other needs, and to write books oneself. Kati commented at 
length on a mutilated safe-conduct, considered to be a docu¬ 
ment.H 
The writings of Khalinia Diakhate (a scholar at the court 
of Lai Dior, circa 1858), Amadu Bamba, Hl-Hadji Malik Sy, 
Mussa Ka, et al.y are merely the continuation in our own age 
of this powerful intellectual movement of earlier centuries. 
Writing was done on paper and calligraphy became an art, as 
in Europe in the Middle Ages. 
He I A skin Daud] was the first to order the building . , . of 
libraries; he employed scribes to copy manuscripts and he often 
made presents of these copies to the Ulemas.9 
Askia Kati s son tells of the beneficence of Askia Daud 
toward his father:! hen he purchased for him this copy of the 
Qamus [dictionary] at a price of eighty mitkals."H] 
Hie author of the Tarikh es Sudan and other scholars of 
the period wrote, as we can see from the above, several other 
works, of which all traces have been lost. Also lost were the 
judicial and administrative archives: assistants of cadis kept 
minutes of the sessions. But tons of documents have disap¬ 
peared. It may be that those manuscripts, of which students of 
the time made several copies, now lie dormant among the 
remains of forgotten hereditary libraries in the Sudan. It was in 
just such circumstances that the Tarikh es Sudan and the 
Tarikh el Fettach were discovered. So it is worthwhile to keep 
looking for such documents in the archives and libraries of 
North Africa, Spain, Portugal, Egypt, Baghdad, and perhaps 
even in Chinese annals. Our Arab scholars have their work cut 
out for them, They can already work on the manuscripts 
discovered by M. Gerincourt concerning the history of Black 
Africa. 


INTELLECTUAL LEVEL 
i 8} 
These are three hundred items lying dormant at the Insti¬ 
tute since 1900, for want of a translator. If Sadi is to be 
believed, the intellectual tradition covered an enormous 
period, the extent of which we do not know today. After 
having shown that the ancients were in the habit of writing 
down historical events and transmitting them to future gener¬ 
al ions, he even stresses a kind of retrogression of learning in 
bis own time (sixteenth—seventeenth centuries)* 
Ihe generation which followed did not have the same 
concerns; none of its members attempted to follow the example 
of the past generation* There was no longer anyone with the 
noble determination to get to know the great men of the world 
or, if there were some individuals consumed with Hits curiosity, 
they were very few m number, From then on, there remained 
only vulgar minds given over to hatred, envy, and discord, who 
took an interest only in things which did not concern them, 
gossip, slander, calumny of ones neighbors, all those things 
which are the source of the worst of our troubles*1 1 
The author then takes up the analysis of the collapse of 
historical science in the Sudan; 
I was witness to the ruination of [historical] science and its 
collapse and 1 observed that its gold pieces and its small change 
were both disappearing. And then, as this science is rich in 
gems and fertile in lessons since it gives man knowledge of his 
own country', his ancestors, his annals, the names of heroes and 
their biographies, 1 beseechcd divine assistance and undertook 
to record myself all that 1 had been able to glean about the 
Sudanese princes of the Sougha i race, recounting their adven¬ 
tures, history, exploits, and battles.12 
These texts, written by a Black scholar in the seventeenth 
century, permit us to form an exact picture of the intellectual 
level of the African elite of the period and their scientific and 
ethical aspirations* 1 hey reveal, among other things, the his¬ 
torical consciousness of the author and the importance he 
already accorded to history in the life of a people. Since Sadi 
Was subsequently named Imam of the mosque of Sank ore, we 


PRliCO I, ON IA1. Bl.ACK AIK If: A 
may gather some idea ot the general level required to till that 
office. 
His work methods, like those of Kati,1-5 which we will 
examine later, reveal a highly rational and deductive mind. We 
should not be misled by the occasional supernatural events 
related in these writings: according to Islam—as well as other 
religions—the divine world does not conform to earthly logic. 
This same supernaturalness is found in other Arab scholars, 
such as Bakri, who reports, on the basis of witnesses’ accounts 
which he seems completely to believe, the coupling of goats 
with plant life. I his is in the description of the impregnating 
of small goats in the city of Iscrni on the upper Senegal.14 
Kati devotes a paragraph to the etymology of Soni (Chi), 
gives the names of the authors who arc his authorities, such as 
Baba Guro, discourses on the date of the introduction of the 
titles of askia and hi-koi, quotes various documents and dis¬ 
cusses them in deep detail. He had carried out an extensive 
inquiry into the common origin of the Sonis, the Askia 
Mohammed, and all those with the surname of Moi. 
Meanwhile, I questioned all the people I met coining from 
Kanaga, BTtu, Mali, Dtafurnu, etc., inquiring of them whether 
in their respective countries there was a tribe called Mo'i-Ka or 
Moi-Nanko, and they all answered: “We have never seen nor 
heard of anything like that.”15 
I he author was very conscious of his duty as a researcher: 
The building of (the kan fart's] capital was then begun, 
broin our research concerning the chronological history of this 
period, it appears that the time was the year 902 [September 2, 
1496 to August 29, 1497]. The number of masons employed at 
the start was exactly one hundred. They were under the direc¬ 
tion of one Uahab Bari.16 
Long before colonization, then. Black Africa had acceded 
to civilization. It might be argued that these centers of civiliza¬ 
tion were, for the most part, influenced by Islam, and that 


INTELLECTUAL LEVEL 
7 N 5 
there was nothing original, nothing specifically African about 
them. All that has gone before allows us to evaluate that. 
Moreover, we have already stressed that Christian Europe at 
the time was no more original than Mohammedan Black 
Africa; Latin, until the nineteenth century, had remained the 
language of science. Gauss, “the prince of mathematicians," 
wrote his memoirs in Latin. 
Forgetfulness of our past now becomes a tangible fact. 
Just as much as the documents allow, as we have done, the 
resuscitation, the defossilization of African history for the last 
two thousand years or so, just that much has the memory of it 
had been driven from our consciousnesses during the colonial 
period. 
Alongside Islamizcd Sudan, in the region of Benin, an¬ 
other, strictly traditional center of civilization shone with 
incomparable brilliance: one can say, without exaggeration, 
that the “realistic" art of Ife and the Benin, with its harmo¬ 
nious proportions, its balance, its serenity that makes one 
think of certain Greek works of the sixth century, represents 
African sculptural “classicism." The Yoruba had been civi¬ 
lized just as well as the Islamized Africans: entire studies 
should be devoted to that civilization. 
Black Africa developed its own scripts. In the Cameroon 
there is a hieroglyphic script, the systematic development of 
which (by the Ndyuya) may be of recent date, but not so its 
origin. The syllabic script of the Vai' in Sierra Leone and the 
cursive of the Bassa have been studied by Dr. Jeffreys. The 
Nsibidi system is alphabetical. In Sierra Leone, these scripts 
have even been used for the writing of some modern texts. Five 
years ago, an assembly was held to discuss both the means of 
defense against the invasion by Occidental characters, and the 
introduction of foreign phonemes. Thus, it is a script which 
still h as a certain vitality. 
It was customary to give to science a character of revel a- 


l 86 
1‘RF.CO LONIAL LI LACK AFRICA 
tiou: this made it more prestigious. Kati does not hesitate to 
attribute a goodly portion of the results of his inquiries to the 
benevolent genie Shamharush: lie is the true reveal or of 
knowledge. He was the one who permitted the origin of the 
Songhai and other tribes to be traced.1 
By such thought processes, the Koran gradually was 
turned into a kind of Book of Thoth. The Egyptians believed 
that this book contained all the magic formulae the incanta¬ 
tion of which, according to prescribed ritual, allowed for 
controlling the universe in all its forms. This frame of mind, 
which is found everywhere in Black Africa, reminiscent ol the 
beliefs of the Middle Ages, had an influence on the Koran: 
recitation of a given verse would allow one to find lost objects, 
another verse would protect one from his enemies, or from 
bad luck, and so forth, because the Prophet was supposed to 
have uttered them in identical circumstances. 
IMPORTANCE OF THE SHE RIF 
Along the same lines, one cannot exaggerate the impor¬ 
tance of the Shcrif, i.e., the descendant of the Prophet, in the 
social life of the time. When Askia Mohammed made his 
pilgrimage, he begged the Abasside caliph Mulay Abbas to 
convince one of these holy personages to go and live with him 
in the Sudan. It was thought, indeed, that such a person 
radiated blessedness all around him; the ground he walked 
on, his clothing, everything he touched, all assured salvation; 
his look, his handshake were salvatory. the inhabitants of ' 
whole country could thus accede to paradise by associating 
with a Slierif living in their land. I bis belief explains all the 
consideration which Black Africa until our day has shown the 
Sherifs. Not only were they exempt from all the duties ol 
citizenship (taxes, etc.), but they received gifts ol impressive 
value. It was with a gift of one hundred thousand dinars, live 


I NTE I.LF.CTUA 1. LF.VF.L 
8? 
hundred slaves, and a hundred camels, if we are to believe 
Kati, that Asfeia Mohammed greeted the Sherif sent from 
Mecca by Mulay Abbas. The latter did not hesitate to decree 
in a letter all sorts of administrative exemptions for the Shcrit, 
as preconditions for his journey. Immediately upon receipt of 
this message, the Askia complied by having his secretary, Ali 
ben Abdallah, draw up on the spot an edict granting all these 
privileges throughout the whole country, which he gave to his 
distinguished guest. These advantages due to being descen¬ 
dants of the Prophet (especially in Black Africa) are the reason 
that most Arabs, even Muslim Berbers of Mauritania, invent 
out of whole cloth Slierifian family trees in Black lands where 
checking on their authenticity is virtually impossible. I he 
offspring they leave here and there in large measure explain the 
claims of certain Africans, of more or less mixed ancestry, that 
they are of Sheridan origin. From four hundred years ago (the 
time of Kati and Sadi) to this day, the situation has remained 
unchanged.18 
The Shcrifs, in order to hold and increase their prestige, 
make consummate use of drugs (opium and hashish) which 
they discreetly mix with tobacco for smoking or give to their 
followers (the talebs) to chew, i his gives rise to wonderful 
visions. The believer who conies back to his senses when the 
effects of the drug wear off is thus convinced that the gates ol 
heaven were opened to him for a moment, and that lie was 
thus miraculously, divinely transported to paradise. Such 
practices, in those days, were in common use throughout the 
religious Orient. Askia Mohammed fell victim to them as 
soon as the holy personage he had so loudly called for arrived. 
AH others were excluded so that the two men might meet tete- 
a-tete, after which the Askia reported: “I saw the entire world 
as if transformed into a mass of water, the stars seemed to 
come from this water and rise toward the heavens, and birds 
appeared to converge around me and kill one another 
off ” 19 
* * » 


b ta. h* h* m* 
■cu m ju. mdu fa ya, at 
1 c Z~~tz s 't <*> 
b fe b fi fc fir fa 
Some characters of written vat (from Baumann and Westermann Les 
pies et les Civilisations de VAfrique), 
t> X & tS* ~^> 
a & c d e $ 
—* x $ 'tH 
% a -1 -t -e 
j\rs/£>;<// symbols. 
S PI ft 
f] "PI CAaJj- 
fl0O 
CSS'S 
rg/g/ 
9W3 
AJ&Ai 
Bassa words. 


* m 
/// 
© 
M- 
* * # 
> 
0 w—0 
4 
8=> 
Written characters common to mende and Egyptian. 
© ® 
v M, © 
Written characters common ro mourn and Egyptian. 
mourn 
word meaning 
1907 
1? 
1911 
2? 
191 B 
3? 
1918 
4? 
phonetic 
value 
'pwo 
arm 
fn P pwo p 
m 
mi 
visage * A A A 
mi m 
! na 
tocook \A m [n n 
na n 
__J 
Several examples of the evolution of mount writing between 1907 and 1918. 


]' R E c: O L O N I A L HI. AC K A L RICA 
! 90 
SURVIVAL OF THE BLACK TRADITION IN EDUCATION 
It is now time to examine what parts of traditional educa¬ 
tion survived the experience of Islam. The African has an 
apparently paradoxical conception of the formation of the 
individual and character-building. He believes that ii is during 
earliest childhood, before the setting-in of noxious habits, 
that body and mind must be trained for both physical and 
mental endurance. The Koranic school in Mohammedan Af¬ 
rica became the place for such training: attendance begins 
between the ages ol four and five. Outside of such large cities 
as Dakar, Saint-Louis, Bamako, etc., children are separated 
from their parents for months and even years. It is the excep¬ 
tion for one to choose a teacher from the same village; in that 
case, the child would not be in the condition of material and 
moral isolation considered indispensable to the formation of 
his personality. He would be the victim of an excess of mater¬ 
nal affection. I was thus sent for four years to Koki, returned 
to Djurbcl-Plateau20 and then again to Kcr-Cheikli ([bra ball). 
On average, one can recite the Koran at age eleven, with¬ 
out being able to translate a single passage of it. One is even at 
that time able to write out the entire text from memory, 
including proper punctuation. This first cycle of study, whici 
ends at age eleven, constitutes the primary level; next, out 
enters upon what may be called secondary and higher cduca 
tion, having as its program the study of grammar, Moham¬ 
medan law, and history—especially that of Islamizcd Asia—as 
well as the theoretically prohibited subject of the Kabbala 
(which is useful for making talismans). Koranic verses are also 
used for this purpose. 
Before Islam, children were marked by the period spent 
with other members of their generation at the time of circum¬ 
cision: this lasted approximately one month, the time it took 
for the operation to heal. Ordinarily one was circumcised at 
age twenty. This custom was altered in Muslim Africa, where 


INTELLECTUAL LEVEL 
19 I 
the child was circumcised as early as possible, between six and 
ten years of age, during the time of his Koranic schooling. 
However that may be, all the groups of circumcised form 
classes by age and are initiated into the secrets of the universe 
on the same day, at the completion ol this ordeal. A bond of 
solidarity is thus established that lasts throughout life: it 
implies mutual support in time of misfortune, loyalty, open 
camaraderie, and wholesome familiarity'. This bond is 
stronger than that uniting soldiers having served in the same 
outfit, for one feels a kind of religious or moral fear of break¬ 
ing it, or not respecting the obligations inherent in it: one is, 
according to a Wolof expression, a mbok lei, that is, a member 
of the same “local.” The “local” is the fortuitous establish¬ 
ment set up by the circumcised individuals themselves, out¬ 
side the village, far from any other habitation and, especially, 
far from women. 
An older, already-circumcised individual, having had the 
experience, directs all the local’s activities for the whole 
period. Being already initiated, along with some of his coevals, 
he works for a month at initiating the younger group. During 
the day they go hunting, armed with two sticks (called 
lettgue), used to bring down poultry when they break into a 
village to grab supplies by main force. Iradition tolerates this 
kind of plunder in the circumstances. T he marauders’ faces are 
covered with ashes, making them unrecognizable; they paint 
their “boubous,” their “Phrygian” liberty caps, sometimes 
even their faces. At night, they gather around the lire at the 
local to sing and solve the riddles of the selbe (the second in 
command of the local). These songs are the purest variety of 
lay folk poetry in Black Africa: they deserve to be collected 
from one end of the continent to the other, 'lhey contain 
practically all the riddles the circumcised youth is expected to 
solve; he must understand and explain the significance of the 
allusions made in them, the true meaning of their special 
vocabulary. By the training the circumcised lad is given, the 


I yz 
P RECOLONIA.L II LAC K A FRI C A 
discipline to which he is subjected, the local is, in more than 
one way, reminiscent of the army barracks; it puts the final 
touches to his education, is his rite of passage to maturity, and 
his entry into "'tile city," in the sense of that term in antiquity. 
There is a tendency in Muslim Africa to neglect physical 
education, especially among the clergy. This is not a new 
situation: Sadi had emphasized its drawbacks. When the 
scholars of Timbuktu, fleeing Sonni Ali, wanted to go on 
eamelback to Biro (Ualata), they had the greatest difficulty in 
remaining on their mounts, for they were so weak and emaci¬ 
ated, so unaccustomed to physical exertion: 
On the day ol departure, one could see mature men, with 
full beards, trembling with fear when they were to mount the 
camels, then tumbling back to the ground as soon as the 
animals rose to their feet. It was simply that our virtuous 
ancestors kept their young tied to them, so that they grew up 
knowing nothing of the things of this life, because when young 
they had never played. But playing at that age shapes a man and 
teaches him a great many things. The parents then regretted 
having acted as they had and, when they returned to Timbuktu, 
they gave their children time to play, and relaxed the constraints 
they had imposed upon them.21 
HISTORICAL REMINDER: THE MOROCCAN INVASION 
We may conclude this chapter by a brief reminder of the 
Sudanese—Moroccan War of 1593. The Moroccan troops 
sent by Mulay Ahmed were under the command of Djuder. 
Thanks to the firearms they had, they were easily victorious 
over the troops of Askia Ishaq II, and seized Timbuktu. The 
Moroccan occupation was as short as it was violent and 
limited. Limited, because the actual authority of the pashas, 
who represented the king of Morocco, in fact never went 
beyond Timbuktu. Since the reign of Ishaq I, Morocco had 
been interested in the salt mines of Teghezza, the area which 


INTELLECTUAL level 
19} 
formed the northern border of Songhai, on the Tropic of 
Cancer. A Sudanese governor, the Teghezza-mondzo, tradi¬ 
tionally administered this frontier borderland, in the same 
way as the far has of Ualata and Aoudaghast. The Tropic of 
Cancer, by and large, was the limit of Black Africa; beyond it 
lay a no-man’s land extending as far as the south of Morocco 
and Algeria, According to Sadi, the sultan of Morocco, after 
having secretly gathered all useful intelligence regarding the 
forces of Gao at that time, deliberately launched his troops 
into the country. I'he first commander of these troops, Djudcr, 
was quickly replaced by Pasha Mahmud ben Zergun, because 
he had not been ruthless enough. l ive latter immediately 
undertook inside Timbuktu a series of roundups, massacres, 
and extortions of all sorts, the cruel character of which beg¬ 
gars the imagination—particularly when one considers that 
the victims were not only brothers in religion, hut mainly 
scholars and jurists. J he entire Sudanese intelligentsia were 
tricked into congregating in the Sankorc mosque and cap¬ 
tured; all doors were sealed, then all those present were let out 
'‘with the exception of the jurists, their friends, and their 
followers.” They were thus arrested by Zergun, on October 
2.0, 1593, without their having conspired, without any pretext 
whatsoever. They were divided into two columns, in order to 
he led away to their new forced residence. One of these col¬ 
umns was completely massacred en route as a result of an 
incident. Sadi supplies the long list of the victims’ names, all 
scholars and learned men, who were afterward buried in a 
potter’s field: 
Among the victims of this massacre there were nine persons 
belonging to the great families of Sankorc: the very learned 
jurist, Ahmed-Moya, the devout jurist, Mohammed-El-Amin, 
and so on, and so on . . ,21 
An order was issued to Amradocho, under whom the 
massacre had taken place, to bury the corpses within his own 


i94 
P RH COLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
house. I he residences of these notables were completely emp¬ 
tied of all their belongings: 
The pasha’s people carried off all they could lay their 
hands on, forcing both men and women to strip naked so they 
could search them. They then abused the women and led them 
as well as the men away to the casbah where they were held 
captive for six months.25 
At the end of this period the prisoners were deported to 
Marrakesh: the famous Ahmed Baba, the highly educated 
scholar of Timbuktu, was among them: “They thus left in a 
great body, made up pell-mell of fathers, children, grand¬ 
children, men and women all together. The caravan set out on 
Saturday . . . March 18, 1594.”24 
Zergun was later to be disgraced for having given the 
Sultan only one hundred thousand mitkals out of the im¬ 
mense booty he had extorted from the Sudanese. Meanwhile, 
national resistance began to organize around Askia Null, who 
had not accepted Moroccan domination. All the inhabitants 
of the Gao region followed him south, to the land of Dcndi. 
For two years, he harassed the Moroccan troops, at times 
inflicting bloody defeats on them, despite the inequality of 
arms between them, During one encounter Pasha Zergun was 
killed, his head cm off and sent to Askia Nuh. The Moroc¬ 
cans attempted to set up as Askia an individual favorable to 
them (Seiiman), but lie was never accepted by the people. 
Shah-Maka'i studied the military tactics of the Arabs, which at 
the time were copied from those of the Turks. 1 le then joined 
the resistance movement, harassed the Moroccan troops, and 
caused them great losses.25 
It is impossible to describe all the dramatic turns of this 
atrocious war waged by Morocco against Black Africa. Our 
quotation on page 195 gives an idea of the extent of the 
desolation, poverty, and ruin into which the country had 
fallen; people were even reduced to eating human flesh, as had 
occurred during the Hundred Years’ War in Europe. Plague 
ravaged the land, as a result ol a breakdown of hygiene. Kan 


INTELLECTUAL LEVEL 
195 
and Sadi agree in situating at this time the corruption of 
morals and, especially, the introduction of sodomy into Black 
Africa. 
One could not completely enumerate all the evils and 
losses suffered by Timbuktu through the installation of the 
Moroccans within its walls; one could never exhaust the list of 
atrocities and excesses they committed there. In order to build 
boats they ripped the doors off houses and chopped down the 
city’s trees.-'-'• 
Moroccan authority rapidly waned; the pashas, who 
were obeyed less and less even in Timbuktu, tried to distance 
themselves from the sultan and became local pseudo-chiefs. 
The Moroccan army, some of whose members were Spanish 
mercenaries, left in Sudan what were called “armas”: these 
were the halfbreeds of Timbuktu, born of the occupation; the 
last of the pashas were chosen from among them. 
It is out of concern for historical truth that we today 
recall these painful events. 
N O T E S 
T. Sadi, T.S*t XVM, pp, 177-178, 2., Kati, /’, F., XVI, p. 3 l 6. 
3- Sadi, f,S,} X, p. 66, 4. Idem., PP- 76- 77- 
%. Idem., X, 
P- 65* 
6„ Idem., X, p, 78. 7. Idem., X, pp. 83-84. 
8, 1 Kati, T,F„ VI, 
p. 14 1 - 
Idem.. XI, p. i?7- io* idem., XI, p . 201. 
11. Sadi, t\S.t Introduction, pp. 2—3. 1 1. Idem - P- 3« 
f 3- Kati began writing his book in 1519. 
H- Al Bakri, op. c it., pp, 3 31—338. 
Kan, Tf., V, p. 94 (see also pp, 67, 8g, 82, 83, 88, ioo, tor). 
1 6. Idem., VI, p. 123. 17, Idem., 1, p. 48« 
18. Idem,, I, pp. 23- 
30. 
19, Idem., J, p. 39, 
10. To Ker Gumag (the Great House, that of Ahmadu Bamba, the founder 
of Muridism). 
ii. Sadi, T.X, XII, p. 106, 22. Idem., XXIV, p. 2.59* 
M- idem., p. 2.61. 14. Idem., p. 2.64. 
25, idem., p. 176* 
i6. Kati, T.F., XV, p. 282. 


Chapter Nine 
TECHNICAL LEVEL 
This chapter deals with the creation and development of tech¬ 
niques in precolonial Africa. From this viewpoint, architecture 
assumes special importance, judging from the remains of it 
found on the continent. 
ARCHITECTURE IN NILOTIC SUDAN 
According to all the documents currently available to us, 
the Sudan was one of the earliest civilizations in Black Africa: 
it was the Ethiopia of antiquity. Present-day Ethiopia was 
merely an eastern province which was not separated from it 
until well after the Ptolemaic era in Egypt. 
The discovery of the ancient capital of Meroe by 
Cailliaud, following the information given by Herodotus and 
Diodorus Siculus, lias allowed unearthing of the sub-founda¬ 
tions of several ancient structures. Lepsius later discovered the 
foundation of an astronomical observatory there: on the walls 
of this edifice was found a scene representing persons operat¬ 
ing an instrument which it might not he inappropriate to call 
an astrolabe (sec illustrations pp. 197 and L98). There was also 
found a series of numerical equations relating to astronomic 
events which occurred two centuries n.c. 
Still standing around the capital are eighty-four pyramids 
which, like those in Egypt, were royal sepulchers; also some 
temples, such as the one at Semna. 
196 


TECHNICAL LEVEL 
197 
ARCHITECTURE IN ZIMBABWE 
In the Zambezi River basin of Zimbabwe (formerly Rho¬ 
desia), monumental ruins, today fallen into disuse, cover a 
surface practically as large as France; they arc almost Cyclo¬ 
pean structures, with walls several meters thick; five at the 
base, three at the top, and nine meters in height. 
Edifi ccs of all types are to be found there from the royal 
palace, the temple, and the military fortification to the private 
villa of a notable. The walls are of granite masonry. De Ped- 
rals, quoting Miss Caton Thompson, cites an opinion accord¬ 
ing to which these remains might be attributed to the present- 
day Ba-Venda tribe of South Africa, for the following reasons: 
A scene representing persons operating an astronomical instrument (re¬ 
drawn by Lcpsms: see Lti Science mysterieuse des pharaons)* 


*9^ P RE COLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
the peoples proved that they knew the uses of stone, as evi¬ 
denced by the Dzata ruins left by them in Zimbabwe; more¬ 
over, the instruments of divination found in Zimbabwe are 
those of the Venda cult.1 
I his instrument was used to make observations of the position of the sun on 
the meridian at Me me {from La Science myster reuse dcs pharaons). 


TECHNICAL LEVEL 
199 
In any case, the notion of attributing these ruins to a non- 
African, non-Black people (Persians, Arabs, Phoenicians, or 
Israelites: King Solomon’s Mines) is once anti for all invali¬ 
dated. All of the digs carried out so far at the site have indeed 
yielded only Bantu-type skeletons. 
It may be that these peoples found it necessary to build 
systems of defense against Oriental enemies coming from Asia 
via the Indian Ocean: 
Mstiver's conclusions on the “Nickcrk" ruins are that 
"they were inhabited by a people who must have lived in 
perpetual apprehension of attack and therefore protected them¬ 
selves behind one of the vastest series of entrenchment lines to 
be found any where 111 the world.”- 
ARCHITECTURE IN GHANA AND THE NIGER BEND 
It will be remembered that, according to Idrisi, the em¬ 
peror of Ghana lived in a stone-fortified castle equipped with 
glass windows and adorned inside with sculptures and paint¬ 
ings. It is said to have been built in iti 6. I he other houses in 
the capital were of stone, with beams of acacia; they were, 
according to all appearances, the homes of the notables; those 
of the common people were clay huts covered with straw roofs. 
On these last points, Bakri’s testimony is confirmed by that of 
Idrisi. 1'hc digs made in this region by lionnel de Mezicres 
early in this century (1911-1:913) support in large measure 
the statements of the Arab chroniclers and geographers of the 
eleventh and twelfth centuries. A city was discovered which is 
presumed to be the old capital, with vestiges of houses of 
several stories, nearly inhabitable but for some missing fix¬ 
tures, with walls thirty centimeters thick, some metallurgical 
workshops, and so on. But at the height of the Ghanaian 
empire, there were in this region several large cities with 
houses and other buildings made of stone (Nema, Ualata, 


200 
P RFC OLON IA L B LACK AFRICA 
Aoudaghast, and Kurnhi, which was probably the autoch¬ 
thonous name of Ghana), 
So we must conclude that in truth we are not absolutely 
certain that Bonne] de Mezieres discovered the old capital, 
rather than only the location of some one of these old cities, 
other, however, than Aoudaghast, which was situated much 
farther west; it was Delafosse who identified one of the four 
ruined centers as Ghana,3 
What was the style of this architecture? In the present 
state of research, that is hard to say. We can, on the other 
hand, infer what it might have been by comparison to the 
apparently more recent style known as that of Djenne and 
Timbuktu. European manuals ordinarily attribute this style to 
some North African Arab origin, introduced, it is claimed, by 
Ks Sakaii (the builder), who was brought back from the 
Maghreb by Kankan Muss a on his return from his pil¬ 
grimage, so that this Spanish Arab architect-poet might build 
him a mosque. Among the accounts which might allow for 
such a belief, that of I bn Khaldun, drawn from his /Vo* 
legomena, is one of the most decisive: he relates as follows 
what was told him by one of the Arab companions of Kankan 
Mussa. 
We accompanied him as far as the capital of his kingdom; 
and* as he wished to have a new reception hall built, he deter¬ 
mined that it would he solidly constructed and overlaid with 
plaster, for such buildings were as yet unknown in his country, 
Abu-Ishac-d- hiedjen [Es Sakali], a man skilled in several arts, 
undertook to fulfill the king’s wish and built a square-shaped 
hall surmounted by a cupola. He employed all the resources of 
his genius in this construction, and having overlaid it in plaster 
and adorned it with arabesques in brilliant colors he made of it 
an admirable monument.4 
On rereading this text attentively, we realize that the 
authors went greatly beyond what it allows us to affirm* In the 
first place, it deals with a reception hall and not a mosque; 


TECHNICAL LEVEL 
20 t 
while they have it that lis Sakali built a mosque, the ruins of 
which can still be seen at Gao. But the architectural details as 
revealed in the text are even more interesting when contrasted 
with those of the style alleged to have been imported. Khaldun 
is categorical: a square hall, surmounted by a cupola and 
decorated with arabesques. Now, these three architectural 
features which characterize the '.tyle allegedly introduced by 
Ls Sakali, are absolutely not to be found in the Sudanese style. 
The buildings there are never square, but rather oblong: there 
are never any arabesques. Its soberness of line, its massive 
rather than frail appearance, and the absence of arabesques 
would seem to make it the lone Arabic art form not authen¬ 
tically Arabic. I here are never any cupolas: in the whole area 
of West Africa, from the Sudan to the Ivory Coast, it is 
impossible to find the slightest cupola atop any one of the 
mosques built in this style. This is significant, in the extent to 
which ecclesiastical Arabic architecture has remained un¬ 
changed from that time to our own day. 
By contrast, the pyramidal columns enjamhed into the 
wall and the pointed sides that characterize Sudanese style 
have no parallel in either Arabic or European architecture, 
l here is lacking any explanation of the devices by which a 
people might export what it does not have. It would indeed be 
paradoxical for a makeshift architect, an amateur (as Es 
Sakali was), to be able to import into a foreign country a style 
which did not exist in the architectural traditions of his own 
country. 1 his elementary condition would have to be fulfilled 
for the supposition made in the manuals to become accept¬ 
able. St is more judicious to abandon this erroneous interpre¬ 
tation of the texts, which consists of making diem say what 
simply is not in them out ot the desire to defend one's cher¬ 
ished notion. 
There is as much difference between the Arabic style of 
whatever period {including Spain) and that of the Sudan, as 
there is between a Gothic cathedral and a Romanesque basil- 


202 
PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
ica. It must also be pointed out that it is in the construction oi 
mosques that Arabic architecture is most immutable. Almost 
all of them are built on the same plan, growing out of the same 
style (cupola, minaret, etc.). So we are asked to believe that in 
Black Africa alone this style is not followed. On the contrary, 
the originality of this Sudanese art is readily apparent: a 
glance at a single example suffices to show that the pyramidal 
motif was exploited throughout. This whole architectural 
style is based on this principle. The general shape of the 
edifice dearly grows out of a truncated pyramid; all the mas¬ 
sive columns which adorn the facade arc more or less discreet 
recalls of the same motif. Kven the architecture of the tombs of 
this region (called tumuli) reveals the same kinship; they arc 
pyramids truncated through erosion, built of brick-red terra 
cotta, often arranged in a semicircle on an hast-West axis. 
I heir average dimensions range from 15 to 18 meters high, 
with i 50 to 200 square meters base surface, according to 
Des pi agues: 
! hese tumuli are particularly numerous in the lake region 
comprised between the cheerless duties surrounding Timbuktu 
to the Hast and the great grazing plains fertilized by Lake Delm 
to the West.5 
Thus, under the same latitude, from Nubia to the Sudan, 
interment was done under the same conditions, all the tombs 
having the same pyramidal shape. It would rather be to the 
Temple of Edfu (I gypt) with its symmetrical pyramidal 
pylons that one might if need be compare the Sudanese style. 
At the time of Kankan Mttssa, Black Africa already had her 
own masons, organized into bodies, each with a foreman. 
Kati tolls of a tradition according to which, whenever Kankan 
Mussa passed through a village on a 1'riday, he had a mosque 
built there. Which is said to be why he built the mosques of 
Timbuktu, Dukurcy, Gundam, Direy, Uanko, and Baku.6 It is 
hardly necessary to mention that Katt, who relates this opin¬ 
ion, considers it groundless, as representing a material impos- 


TECHNICAL LEVEL 
203 
sibility. It belo ngs to that category of legends developed after 
the fact which often enjoy wide currency in Black Africa. 
When the Askia Mohammed seized Djaga in 1495, he 
captured five hundred masons, with their foreman Ka- 
ramogho; of these he kept four hundred, sending the other 
hundred to his brother the viceroy, the prime dignitary of the 
kingdom, the Kanfari, Amar Komdjago, to build his capital 
city of Tendirma, on the right bank of the Niger, not far front 
Timbuktu. 
The notion that Black Africa had no architecture of its 
own before the arrival of Sakali is contrary to the facts: the 
testimony of Arab authors themselves mentioned above, Bakri 
and Idrisi (for Ghana) and Battuta (for Mali), prove this point. 
The digs carried out by Bound de Mezieres and Desplagnes in 
the Ghana region and on the Nigerian plateau confirm it. The 
existence of fortified cities called tutus (the equivalent of for¬ 
tified castle or stronghold) dates hack well before this time. 
When lbn Battuta visited tire capital of Mali, it was 
already customary to lay out wide, very straight thor¬ 
oughfares, flanked by trees on both sides. 
At Taniberma, Northern logo, some veritable fortified 
castles with peripheral towers and lookouts have been found. 
This architecture is all the more interesting in that its style is 
an extension by artful exploitation of the lines of the custom¬ 
ary hut.s 
In former times, the palace of the Oni of He “was a 
structure built of authentic enameled bricks, decorated with 
artistic porcelain tiles and all sorts of ornaments. J 
The houses of the Habes (the Dogons studied by Marcel 
Griaule) are built of stone, with several stories, cut into cliffs. 
Some of these buildings are partially below ground level, and 
thus have subterranean cellars. 
The tiered attics in the shape of parallelepipedal towers 
arc of a style directly related to that of the crenellated walls of 
the tatas and Sudanese mosques.10 
Finally, despite the hiatus in jumping from recorded his- 


20 4 
PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
cory ro prehistory', the Saharan period before the last gre.it 
drought {7000 bx.) seems to be part of the cultural cycles of 
Black Africa, it we are to judge by the cave paintings brought 
out by Henri Lhote. 
METALLURGY 
From Nubia to Senegal, still along the same latitude 
which seems to belong to the same area of civilization, active 
blast furnaces produced the iron required for technological 
and economic activity. It is almost certain that wood was the 
fuel used. The use of metallurgy in Black Africa dates hack to 
time immemorial. Mining of ore, smelting of metal, and 
working with it were not taught to Africans hy any foreigner. 
In 1956, M. Lcclant, director of the (.'enter for Egyptian 
Studies at the University of Strasbourg, during a lecture at the 
Scale des Hautes Etudes, alluding to the British metal indus¬ 
try, strongly pointed out that, in classical times, Nubia 
(Meroe) was comparable to Birmingham in metallurgical pro¬ 
duction and distribution. 
1’oday the blast furnaces of the Baya, Durru, Namchi, 
Tchamba, Wutc, Margin, Batta, Dama, etc., are still in opera¬ 
tion. 11 
The appearance in bronzes of the Benin of knights ar¬ 
rayed m all manner of cuirasses, armored from head to toe, 
seems to prove that metallurgy was put to all kinds of uses, for 
all of this armor was, without doubt, of local manufacture. 
Beginning at an early period, in view of the climate, every 
effort was made to manufacture these items in a material other 
than iron, while retaining the same shape, provided, of course, 
that they would he sufficiently protective. I hat is why this 
armor ended up, in the final period of Benin history, appear¬ 
ing to he purely decorative items. Here we must recall the 
many knights tit medieval Europe who succumbed beneath 


TECHNICAL LEVEL 
Z05 
their cuirasses on the road of the Holy Land, during the 
Crusades, due to the rigors and heat of the climate. 
The technique of casting bronze by the lost wax process, 
which accounts for the beautiful realistic artworks of the 
Benin, was shared between this Gulf of Guinea region on the 
Atlantic and ancient Meroe. Goldsmithcry, the making of 
gold filigree, which is a specialty of Black Africa, the working 
of copper, tin, and alloys, all had already become widespread 
in precolonial Africa. It will be recalled that Samory, during 
bis resistance against France, had had European rifles dupli¬ 
cated by local blacksmiths. Admittedly, their efficiency was 
not the same, since the metal was not of the same quality. 
Locksmithing was also known in Africa at the time. 
The repeated victories of Nubia over the Roman army 
(Cornelius Callus) in Z9 R.c. may perhaps give us some idea 
of the technological level of Nubia in this period. 
GLASSMAKING 
It is glassinaking, however, especially in the Benin region, 
which deserves our attention. On the one hand, because it is 
least expected, and on the other, because it had already at that 
time attained a semi-industrial stage, the workers having or¬ 
ganized into veritable guilds (with community workshops, 
refectories, and dormitories). This industry has survived to 
this day, and the Nigerians often utilize as raw material, no 
longer sand, but shards of bottles and glasses which they blow 
or mold into various objects (beads, bracelets, etc.). Thus, 
besides beads of Egyptian, Phoenician, or Venetian origin, 
there are those of properly local creation. 
MEDICINE and hygiene 
Empirical medicine was quite developed in Africa. Here, 
as in ancient Egypt, a family practiced a single branch of 


l’RECOLONIAL BLACK AFIttCA 
106 
medicine on an hereditary basis. One was specialized in the 
eyes, the stomach, and so on. Sadi’s brother underwent a 
successful cataract operation at the hands of the physician 
Ibrahim es Sussi in the port city of Kabara. “The doctor 
carried out the operation and God willed that my brother ht 
delivered from his malady and brought from the darkness into 
the light.”12 
In Senega] especially, war wounds were treated by extrac¬ 
ting the bullets or shrapnel, then cauterizing the wound with 
a mixture of boiling oil and clean sand, before sewing it up. It 
thus happened that some soldiers still had, after recovery, 
lumps of matter (sand) which had remained under the skin. It 
seems no one ever thought of removing them. That peculiar 
process is called rukcib in Wolof. 
Empirical toxicology was highly developed, whence the 
cfficacitv of the poisoned arrows used in warfare. They were 
covered with snake venom or the sap of poisonous plants. 
The use of soap, connected with the rise of urbanism, 
created a level ol hygiene quite remarkable for the period. The 
soap was ot local manufacture: a female slave freed by the 
Askia guaranteed him, as a sign of appreciation, ten cakes of 
soap each year.11 
WEAVING 
I he treadle loom, a local invention, was known to Africa, 
as well as the Yoruban vertical loom; with them may be woven 
fairly narrow strips of fabric, variously decorated, which can 
then be assembled into loincloths or other articles of clothing. 
Cotton was the raw material, as well as a kind of wool in 
Sudan, Linen, silk, and broadcloth, from the time of Askia 
Bunkan on, were imported from Europe. But the native velvet 
of the Balubas was famous. 
Dressmaking, an ancillary trade, assumed capital impor¬ 
tance especially in Timbuktu where, according to Kiiti, there 


TECHNICAL LEVEL 
207 
were master tailors who employed, in establishments known 
as tindi, fifty, seventy, or as many as a hundred apprentices.1' 
This would seem to suggest that there was a certain con¬ 
centration of the means of production, of which presently 
available documents do not allow us to measure the full scope. 
ACRICU lture 
Cultivation of the soil was done either with the darmnba 
(hoe) or with the hilaire (hand plow) in Senegal. The latter 
tool allowed one to till the soil while standing up, whereas 
with the daramba one had to bend over. Its use, therefore, was 
a great improvement in places where it was impractical to use 
a plow. It should be pointed out that the Egyptian plow and 
the African hoe are identical. All the Egyptians had to do was 
to attach a wooden crossbar perpendicularly to the shaft to 
accommodate a harness: the Egyptian plow is just an African 
hoe harnessed to an animal. 
In Black Africa, crop rotation, irrigation, and manuring 
of Helds were all practiced. 
CRAFTS 
Basket-weaving, ceramics, and dyeing were highly de¬ 
veloped crafts, The same was true of shoemaking, thanks to 
plants such as the neneb, which could be used in tanning 
skins, particularly goatskins. 
These techniques having been abundantly studied and 
described in manuals, we need not enlarge upon them here. 
HUNTING 
The hunting of the hippopotamus, on the Senegal River, 
deserves to be described. We can do so, thanks to die testi- 


PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
208 
mony ot Bakri. The hunters, bunched along the bank, were 
armed with short javelins having rings through which passed a 
long lanyard the other end of which was attached to the 
hunter’s wrist. They would patiently lie in wait for the animal; 
when its back came into view, all the converging javelins 
struck different parts of its body. It was dragged out of the 
water by the lanyards, after it had many convulsions which 
left the animal exhausted. I his was how the natives of Kalenfu 
hunted the kafu (or hippopotamus).15 
NAUTICAL EXPERIENCE 
It is clear from the preceding that the navigable water¬ 
courses of Africa were studded with wharves and landing 
docks, which were at one and the same time commercial ports 
and, when necessary, military ones. The largest craft (kcutia) 
could carry a crew of up to eighty men.16 On the Niger, in 
place of the inverted sails characteristic of Black Africa, the 
boats were covered by a mat that formed a kind of roofing 
against the elements. The Askia alone owned over a thousand 
pirogues. Each of his daughters had one for transportation or 
pleasure cruises on the river: just as the Pharaoh’s daughters 
had on the Nile. 
The question has often been asked whether the Africans 
ever left the continent by sea, whether to the West the Atlantic 
Ocean had allowed them, before the arrival of Europeans, to 
establish relations with any other country. Considering the 
enormous obstacles to overcome (all rivers have a bar), spe¬ 
cialists have tended to answer in the negative: this is the point 
of view of Professor Theodore Monod. Yet, it seems that the 
Arabic documents allow us to shed some light on the matter. 
Muhammad Hamidullah, quoting Ibn Fadallah Al Umariy, 
shows that the Emperor of Mali, Kankan Mussa’s predeces¬ 
sor, made two attempts at exploring the Atlantic. In the first 
he equipped two hundred ships for a two-years’ stay at sea: 


TEC I IN 1 C A 1. I.EVI: I 
zoy 
only one of the captains was able to return with bis vessel. The 
recital of the catastrophe he gave the king, instead of dis¬ 
couraging him, prompted him to undertake a second expedi¬ 
tion. Me is then said to have equipped two thousand ships. 
turned his throne over to Sultan Mussa, and embarked with 
the fleet himself. This time nobody returned. The author of 
this study puts forward several arguments to demonstrate that 
this fleet, or perhaps another earlier one, must surely have 
reached America before Columbus. In the first place, not only 
did Columbus’s crew sav thev had found Blacks already there 
before them* but they even gave details of their lives: they 
stressed that the Blacks often fought with the "Redskin" In¬ 
dians* The same author reminds us: 
Christopher Columbus speaks of pirogues allegedly leav¬ 
ing from the coast of Guinea laden with merchandise and 
[leading west. I ie also recounts die arrival of such vessels in the 
Americas, jane {the translator of the journal of Columbus's 
third voyage) writes: . . and that he considered checking the 
veracity of what the Indians of Hispaniola |l laitij said that they 
had come to their island from the south while the Blacks had 
come from the southeast, and that they had javelins with tips 
made of a metal they called guiwiti , , /'1 ’ 
l lie pirogues actually seen by Christopher Columbus 
prove that the bars of the rivers had been crossed, that there 
were indeed precolonial maritime ports, and that the Atlantic 
was no wall to the Blacks of West Africa, The author of the 
article goes further and attempts to establish that relations 
between Africa and pre-Columbian America were relatively 
constant: 
Such navigators, taking to sea again from the Americas for 
the return voyage to Africa, would have loaded provisions of 
new World origin, and of these items the two that would keep 
the longest were sweet corn and tapioca. We thus have an 
explanation of the presence in Africa of two American 
foodstuffs before C olumhus had ever made a voyage there.IS 


2 IO 
PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
We might mention, without however being able to deter¬ 
mine how early it began, that the Blacks of tlie Petite Cote in 
Senegal travel from Dakar to M’Bour by coastal navigation on 
masted cutters of their own construction. One might also 
recall that it was on longboats very' similar to these pirogues 
that the Vikings skimmed the seas for centuries, With just 
such vessels, they journeyed up the Seine as far as Paris, and 
went as far as North America, before Christopher Columbus. 
The African vessels, equipped with outriggers and therefore 
impossible to capsize, were perfectly capable of venturing 
onto the high seas. 
Of course, there still remain many gaps to fill, but the 
above allows us a glimpse of the actual technical level of 
precolonial Black Africa. But even now, what we do know may 
r 
prove quite surprising, and we may close this chapter by 
meditating upon the following idea of M. l.eroi-Gourhan, 
which reads almost like a maxim: 
“If th ere be a goal for humanism, it lies in a humanism 
which would not only reach the limits of mankind everywhere 
on the entire Earth, but also integrate the reality of material 
man with the reality of religious or social man/'34 
N O T E S 
i* D. l\ de ]\:drals, Arebeologie de i'Afrique Noire (Paris; Payot, 1950), 
p. 59* 
1. M. A. [aspan, op, at,, p. 107 {Presence Africaine, p* r 5 1), quoting from 
LX R. Mac I vet, hAvduieval Rhodesia (London, 1906), 
3, LeroLGourhan and Poirier, op. at., p. 215. 
4, Ibn Khaldun, op. at., p. 113. 
S' - Xoms Desptagncs, Le Plateau Centra! Niger ten (Paris; I, a rose, 1907), 
p. 57* 
6. Kati, T. F.t ch. N, pp. 56-5 H. 
7. Idem., VI, pp. 1 1 1 9* 
R. CL Baumann, op. cit., p, 411* 
9. Leo I ro ben 1 us, Mythologie de I'Atlantide (trail 5. from the German by 
Oidon) (Paris: Payot, r94?X PR 154-1 56. 
* 


TECHNICAL LEVEL 
21 1 
I Q, Cf. Baumann, op. cit.t \\ 411, 
11. Idem., pp. 3 1 9—32.0. 
il Sadi, /: S., XXXV, p. 445. 
13, Kati, T, R, XI, p, 196, 
14, Idem., XVI, p. 315. 
15, Al Bakri, op. cit.t “Notes sur le pays ties Noirs," pp. 314—3x3. 
16, 7H. L, XV, p, Z70. 
17, Presence Africaine magazine. No. XVI1I-X1X, February-May 1958, 
p. 1 
Idem., p. 1 82. Since these lines were originally written, an American 
Black researcher, Kan Van Sertmia, has published a masterful book on 
the subject, which leaves no doubt about these pre-Columbian naviga¬ 
tions: They Came Before Columbus: The African Presence hi Ancient 
America (New York: Random House, 1977). 
19, Leroi-Go urban and Poirier, op. atp, 43. 


Chapter X 
MIGRATIONS AND FORMATION 
OF PRESENT-DAY AFRICAN 
PEOPLES 
Jn West Africa, one can be certain only that Neolithic remains 
are attributable to tall blacks. The Paleolithic are, generally 
speaking, of uncertain age: some are found at Pita, in Upper 
Guinea. The testimony of Herodotus about the expedition of 
the Nasamonians, who left from Cyrenaica, and of Han no 
and Satapses converges to prove that in the fifteenth century 
B.C., on the whole, tall Blacks had not yet peopled West 
Africa, despite the more or less enigmatic mention made by 
Hanno of “Lixist interpreters.”1 The whole continent at that 
time was partially peopled by Pygmies, with the exception of a 
few- places such as the Nile basin; that is why archeologists 
generally consider Pygmies responsible for all Paleolithic 
traces found in West Africa, especially since they are usually 
just on the surface. Consequently, it is important to stress the 
fact that West African archaeology is rather special; one 
would be hard put to find in it any stratification of civiliza¬ 
tions at a given spot, since most of the peoples migrated at 
relatively recent dates, It is therefore understandable that one 
should be able to hear in this region legends according to 
which the Blacks came from the East, from over near the 
“Great Water,” without the latter being identifiable as the 
Indian Ocean. Two reasons, indeed, contradict that: when 
South African populations arc questioned, they say they came 
from the North; those of the Gulf of Benin say they came from 
the Northeast. In antiquity, the Ethiopians called themselves 
ZI2 


11} 
MIGRATIONS AND FORMATION OF PEOPLES 
autochthons, those who had sprung from the ground. Egyp¬ 
tians considered themselves to have come from the South, 
from Nubia (Sudan, Khartoum, locations of their ancestors: 
the country of Punt). Nubia is the Ethiopia of antiquity. 
Even if mankind did not originate in Africa, even if the 
tail Blacks came from elsewhere, say, from the Indian Ocean as 
in the lxmuric thesis, it could only have been hundreds of 
thousands of years before. But we have just seen that in the 
fifth century R.c., a very recent date, tall Blacks had not yet 
expanded toward the West, while we know for certain that 
they existed on the continent. The idea of a center of dispersal 
located approximately in the Nile valley is worth considera¬ 
tion. In ail likelihood, after the drying of the Sahara (7000 
R.c.), Black mankind first lived in bunches in the Nile basin, 
before swarming out in successive spurts toward the interior of 
the continent. 
By an investigative method using linguistic, ethnological, 
and toponymic data, wc will try to bring out, in a practically 
certain manner, the origins of the I.aobe, 
Yoruba, Agni, Serer, and other peoples. 
Tukulor, Peul, 
First, however, we must recall that D.P. de ftdrals men¬ 
tions2 the Burum who arc found on the Upper Nile and in the 
region of the Benue in Nigeria, the Ga (Gan, Gang) who arc 
found in the region of the Great Lakes and present-day 
Ghana, Upper Volta, and in the Ivory Coast, the Gula (Gule, 
Gulaye) on the Upper Nile and the Chari. The Kara are a 
nucleus living at the borders of Sudan (Khartoum) and Upper 
Ubangi. 1 he Kare are near Logone; the Kare-Karc in the 
northeast of Nigeria, their name being nothing more than the 
doubling of Kare, which is made up of Ka + Re or Ka+Ra, 
two Egyptian ontological notions which we will analyze be¬ 
low. I he Kipstghi (Kapsighi) are in the region of the Great 
Lakes and North Cameroon; the Kissi northeast of Lake 
Nyasa and in the forest of Upper Guinea; the Kundu in the 
former Belgian Congo (Lake Leopold) and the Southern 


1 ht queen subdues a group of vanquished enemies, Meroe, Sudan, has- 
reiiei (redrawn by Lepsius in Iiistoire amienne de t'Egypte by Lenormant), 
Z i 4 


MIGRATIONS AND FORMATION OF PEOPLES 
ZI5 
Cameroon, at the estuary of the Wouri; the Laka live among 
the Nuer of the Upper Nile and the Sara of the Logone and 
Northern Cameroon; the Maka (Makua) on the Zambezi and 
in the Cameroon; the Sango northeast of the Nyasa and on 
the banks of the Ubangi; the Somba (Sumbwa) in the region of 
the Great Lakes and Northern Dahomey. 
One could extend this list and thus localize in the Nile 
Valley, coming from the Great Lakes, the primitive cradle of all 
the Black peoples today living dispersed at the various points 
of the continent. 
It must be recalled that Kandaka (Candace), the name, or 
rather the title, of the queens of the Sudan, beginning with the 
time of Augustus Caesar, was also borne by the first kings of 
Kau (Gao), according to Al Bakri; they were called Kanda. 
! he women of this region, according to the same author, in 
the tenth century wore wigs such as those worn in Lgypt and 
Nubia. In antiquity there was a Nubian nomc called Kau, the 
exact location of which has not yet been identified, according 
to Budge.’ The inhabitants of Upper Egypt were called Kau- 
Kau in rhe Egyptian tongue. We know that Gao is both an 
abbreviation and a deformation of the real name of that city: 
Kau-Kau.4 Inhabitants of the interior of Senegal even today 
have the name of Kau-Kau (Cayor, Baol), which those of the 
coast, as in ancient Libya, are called Lcbou: they are the 
fishermen of the whole region of the Niaye (coastal palm 
forests). 
In old Egyptian, as today in Wolof, Kau has the same 
meaning: high; and in both languages, Kau-Kau means in¬ 
habitants of high places, or high plateaus, it can then be 
presumed that, if present-day inhabitants of Cayor and Baol, 
living on an absolutely flat plain, still bear this name, it might 
be due to a geographical reminiscence explainable by migra¬ 
tion, especially since between them and the coast, then and 
now, there were the Lebou. It is likely that the populations 
who were forced to emigrate did not have time on the way to 


PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
2.1 6 
shot! their habits: the inlanders (Kau-Kau) would have settled 
in the interior, and the coasters (Lebou) on the coast. It may 
be recalled that, until the eleventh century, the capital of 
Songhai was Kukia, some one hundred kilometers from Ka- 
uga (Gao); in all of northern Senegal, the various villages one 
(bids name Koki seem to be replicas of that ancient historical 
city on the Niger, the more likely since the phoneme o does 
not exist in Arabic, but must be translated u, barring some 
arbitrary convention. Yet the documents that today permit us 
to refer to the historical city of Kukia are all written in Arabic. 
Bakri says that Kau-Kau (Gao-Gao) is the sound emitted by 
the royal tom-tom of that capital city. The Cayorians of Sene¬ 
gal also say that the diuttg-diung of the Daniel (the royal 
drum) goes gau-gau. It would seem that we must conclude 
that we are dealing here with ail oral etymology which does 
not exactly fit in with historical reality, to the extent that we 
find roots ot the same word, beyond any possible doubt, right 
up into the valley of the Nile. 
Having made this recall, let us look at the origins of the 
principal peoples of West Africa. 
ORIGIN OF THE YORUBA 
According to J. Olumide Lucas,5 the Yoruha during an¬ 
tiquity lived in ancient Egypt, before migrating to the Atlantic 
coast. He uses as demonstration the similarity or identity of 
languages, religious beliefs, customs, and names of persons, 
places, and things. 
Abundant proof of intimate connection between the an¬ 
cient Egyptians and the Yoruha may be produced under this 
head. Most of the principal gods were well known, at one time, 
to the Yoruha. Among these gods arc Osiris, Isis, Horns, Shu, 
but, 1 both, Khepera, Amon, Ann, Khonsu, Khnum, Khopri, 
Hathor, Sokaris, Ra, Seb, the four elemental deities, and others. 
Most of the gods survive in name or in attributes or in both (p. 
11). 


MIGRATIONS AND FORMATION OF PEOPLES 
217 
l-Ra-Wo in Yoruba means the star that accompanies the 
Sun {wo: to rise), Khonsu has turned into Osu (the Moon). 
The linguistic variations are explained by the author on the 
basis of the phonetics of Yoruba. He reminds us that the 
ontological notions of ancient Egyptian, such as Ka, Akhu, 
Ku, Saku, and Ba, are to be found in Yoruba. He also points 
to the existence of hieroglyphics and expounds all these ideas 
at length over four hundred pages. 
It may be pointed out that the “pope” of the Yoruba, the 
Oni, has the same title as Osiris, the Egyptian God, that there 
is a hill called Kuse, near llc-Ifc, and another of the same 
name in Nubia, near ancient Meroe, to the west of the Nile, in 
the very heart of the country of Kush.6 The name Kuso is 
repeated in Abyssinia. 
ORIGIN OF THE LAO BE 
They would seem to be survivors of the legendary Sao 
people. As a matter of fact, what do we learn about the Sao 
from the Bornu manuscripts and the excavations ot M. Lebeuf 
and my late professor Marcel Griaule? 
These references tel! us of the Sao that (1) their name was 
Sao, Sow, or Si; (2) they were giants; (3) they spent entire 
nights dancing; (4) they left innumerable terra cotta figurines; 
and (5) these statuettes reveal an ethnic type with pear-shaped 
head. 
All five of these traits are found in the Laobc. Their sole 
totemic name is Sow, which has been mistaken lor a Peul 
name. The only sacred object left them, the instrument with 
which they carve, is called a sao-ta. They are all giants, the 
women averaging six feet in height, and the men six feet six or 
more, very easily. They have extraordinarily handsome limbs 
and are always built like athletes. 
Their skulls are pear-shaped, identical with those of the 
ethnic type seen on Sao statuettes. 


T 
Map «f migrations of the peoples of black Africa 
(from la report iUt Huut Nil et </« Grands Lacs), 
11 8 


MIGRATIONS AND FORMATION OF I'EOl’l.ES 
219 
The Laobes' only occupation is carving wooden kitchen 
utensils from tree-trunks, tor all other castes of African society, 
and not only the IVul. Laobe women make terra cotta figu¬ 
rines for the children of other castes. The Laobe, especially the 
women, love to dance; they take part in all fetes and other 
local events. Their main dance, in Senegal, is the kumba laobe 
gas. 
The Laobe were wrongly considered a caste of IVul and 
Tuculor sculptors. I his mistake comes in part from the fact 
that they speak the language of these two peoples. It lias been 
overlooked that the Laobe arc always bilingual, at least in 
Senegal. They speak Wolof as fluently as IVul; but their accent 
in Wolof is not that of a IVul or Tuculor, which would not In¬ 
explicable if they belonged to the same ethnic group as tin- 
latter, differing from them only 111 caste. The Laobe seem to be 
a people who have lost their culture ami whose dispersed 
elements adapt, according to circumstances, by learning the 
languages of tlie regions in which they reside. The totemic 
names other than Sow which they bear reflect their mixture 
with the IVul, I'uculor, and other groups. I he reverse is also 
true; and that explains why some IVul have the name of Sow, 
alongside Ba and ka. 
The Laobe live scattered over different villages in Senegal 
and elsewhere, fhey have no fixed dwellings; it is inaccurate to 
say that they inhabit the b’uta loro (in Senegal) or the Futa 
jallon (in Guinea), territories of the Tuculor and Betti. I hey 
form sporadic groupings within larger ethnic groups. The 
Laobe of Senegal can no longer pinpoint their original hab¬ 
itat; their social organization has completely dissolved; they 
no longer have traditional chiefs. 1 he most respected member 
of the group rides a mule, while donkeys are reserved for 
others. Thus, the case of Med Sow Wediam, a very influential 
Laobe, but who could not properly be called a king; more¬ 
over, he owed his influence mainly to his conversion to the 
Muridism of Amadu Bamba. The Laobe swear on the sao-ta. 
. 


2.2.0 
P RE COLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
which is used not only to carve, but also to circumcise the 
young, a custom they seem to have borrowed from neighbor¬ 
ing peoples. 
ORIGIN Ol THE PEL)L 
At first sight, one might believe that the Peul branch 
originally came from that part of West Africa where Semitic 
Moors and Blacks long remained in contact." Though the 
hypothesis of tins crossbreeding must be accepted, the initial 
site where it took place must be sought elsewhere, despite 
appearances. 
Like other West African populations, the Peul probably 
came from the East, only later. This theory can be supported 
by perhaps the most important fact to date: the identity of two 
typical totemic proper names of the Peul with two equally 
typical notions of Egyptian metaphysical beliefs, the Ka and 
the Ba. 
According to Moret, the Ka is the essential Being, the 
ontological part of the individual which exists in the sky. 
Thus, in the texts of the Old Empire, there is the expression 
“to go to one’s Ka,” meaning to die. The Ka, united with the 
Zet, forms the Ba, the complete being reaching perfection and 
living in the sky.* 
Zet was the part of the being that was purified in the 
“Jackal’s Basin,” according to the Egyptian religion. Set (there 
is no 2 in Wolof and it automatically becomes s when used in a 
foreign word) means clean, in Wolof. Obviously, it is not 
identifiable with the third totemic name of Sow, borne by 
some Beul. 
On the other band, Ka and Ba, these two Egyptian 
ontological notions, are authentically Peul proper names, the 
only ones they must have had in the beginning. 
Ka, or Kao, in old Egyptian, means high, above, great. 


MIGRATIONS AND FORMATION OF PliOPUiS 
2.1 1 
husband, standard, height—whence the description of the 
word by a hieroglyph made up of two arms extended toward 
the sky. It lias die same meaning in Wolof, and one should 
make the connection with Kau-Kau mentioned above. 
Ha, in Egyptian, is represented by a bird with a human 
head, living in the skv; it also is the name of a long-necked 
earthly bird, lid in Wolof means ostrich. So it can be seen that 
these elements of Egyptian metaphysics underwent different 
changes depending on who transmitted them; whereas in 
Wolof the Egyptian meaning is retained, in fleul the words 
have become proper names. It is a known fact that, until the 
Sixth Dynasty, the time of the Osirian revolution (zioo u.c.), 
the Pharaoh alone was entitled to immortality and, conse¬ 
quently, fully enjoyed his Ka and his fia; it is also known that 
several Pharaohs bore this name, among them King Ka, of the 
protodynastic era, whose tomb was discovered at Abydos by 
Atnelineau. I he name of the Held branch of the Kara or Karc 
would then come from Ka + Ra or Ka + Re. 
1 he other Peul names, such as Diallo, would have been 
acquired later, despite appearances. As for their language, it 
has a natural unity with the other Black African languages, 
especially Wolof and Sercr, as shall he shown. 
I he relative hatred which existed, in olden times, between 
the setninomadic Peul and sedentary Africans can be ex- 
plained by their different life styles: the IVul frequently took 
advantage of unguarded fields to let their flocks graze in 
them: whence perhaps the origin of the evil, for this fact is far 
from accidental and its importance cannot he exaggerated. 
But the idea of a IVul hegemony in West Africa is just a 
legend; it docs not conform ro the documents. According to 
Kati and Sadi, Sonni Ali made several expeditions against the 
R*ul; he practically destroyed the clan of the Sangarc (San-Ka- 
Re), the survivors being so few they could gather within the 
shade of one tree.4 
Following one of these expeditions, Sonni Ali distributed 


|tvlet>dj < [Mends 
Sfin 
Biihu 
Lai 
So (Saoi 
BfthUil r. 
Lfli ! 
□ .1 
Kaba 
N DAtn 
--— 0ua 
K3b.ii 
U Dam 
Bousso 
M Ba> 
M BackeWykri 
Uousilo 
M Bin 
M B.itka-Wak.i 
I 
F 
3 
M G.iche Wake 
Ngumta 
Rama 
MBaka-WSkrt 
Ngumba 
Rama 
M Bo* 
0*S33 
Mandumbu ^_ Mbo 
Bassa 
Ndumbo 
Knnde 
Milk a 
Ktindri 
MaM 
BAs 
Salta 
Pende 
Sdg 
Sugu 
N Goma 
Dm 
SyH 
Bflrdba 
Mbongos 
M &*Qk( 
Sum 
M Gom 
Lo 
M Gumb 
Baba 
Bas 
Saaa 
Peodfl 
Hog 
SuK-.j 
N'Gomti 
Dia 
emi 
Bern b a 
Mbengoa 
N BackO 
CbHa 
N Gom 
Lua 
tfgumbu 
Nyan-gyab 
N Gone 
TlI 
N Oiay 
L At 
N Oaf 
Dit?p 
LaldiOf 
Fay 
? J v n r-oq 
Threp 
Djak 
Van 
Nyangem 
Sebfc 
Lam 
Tai 
Sy 
Gik 
Lo 
Thioun 
Pony 
Df0ilg 
Ly 
Man 
Gar 
Kane 
N Gom 
M Banygu+i 
Warm 
BAs 
Garang 
Saba 
Nyanya i 
Ngony 
Titl 
Doa» 
Islti 
Dar 
Duob 
Lathfor 
F flfok 
Ny&ng 
T hiep 
Gnk 
Van 
Nyagnn 
Pole 
Lam 
Tat 
Ci 
Gik 
Lou 
thou 
Pax 
Ceng 
Lilh 
Mar 
Gat 
Kan 
Gom 
Bfinyge 
Wan 
ii--.ro 
Garanq 
Sebo-Saba 
[ S<n~g~o^aida7| ^ j Sungor 
7 
8 
9 
Atu 
Rahi 
Sen 
Aloum 
Rakfi 
S?n 
Anta RamA 
Sar 
Antef 
Ramatria 
Sar 
Sok 
Am mat iAmm.i Hu Kaba 
Sek (Melt 
AmomRa 
K.aba 
Mirl Man 
Kef* 
Men 
MaAt 
Krill 
Karri Nalei i nh) 
Kara i*ate) 
Me-ih 
Ban 
Aminla 
Ba-Ra 
Ament! 
(inaips of Wolol peoples, by their ethnic names. Prevalent names in various 
regions have been grouped by origin [i-to) m the right column. I he left 
column shows the corresponding Wolol names. 


EGYPT 
0 CENTRAL 
SUDAN ■ 
EAST 
SUDAN 
SENNAR 
SARA 
CHAO 
5*ERRA\ 
LEONE>1 
IVORY ' 
' COAST 
SOUTH 
CONGO 
NORTH . 
\ /" CONGO 
several captive IVul women as concubines to those Timbuktu 
scholars who were his friends; Sadi says that one of them was 
his own grand mother.111 
The idea that the nomadic Peui people was feared in 
procolomal Black Africa is also unfounded. U grows out of a 
preconceived notion which tries conic what may to exalt the 
pastoral life, for reasons peculiar to the authors. On the 
contrary, Sadi stresses the lack of material or social strength of 
the nomads who, hy the fact that they were constantly on the 
move, never had the chance or possibility to acquire any power 
that might threaten the sedentary. 


PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
2.2.4 
ORIGIN OF THE TUCULOR 
10day, among the Nuer of the Sudan (Khartoum} on the 
Upper Nile, one finds unaltered the totemic names of the 
Tuculor who live on the banks of the Senegal River, thousands 
of kilometers away. It must he recalled that totemic and ethnic 
names are identical, being the names of the dans. 
Senega! (l uta-loro) 
Sudan (Khartoum) 
Kan 
Wan 
Ci 
Lull 
Kao 
Sv (Ci) 
Ly 
Ka (PenI)11 
In the same region, at a place called Nuba Hills (Nubia 
Hills), we find tribes of the Nyoro and Toro. These two names 
in a way mark out the route followed by the Tuculor migration 
length of time, was to be known as the Nyoro; when they 
arrived on the two banks of the Senegal, the region would be 
known as the Futa-Toro. When one fraction of them went 
down into the Gambia, under .Vlaba Diakhu, ai the time ot 
General l aidhcrbe (1 865), the region would assume the name 
of Nyoro-du-Rip, the latter word being the old name of the 
region, before the Tuculor arrived. 
ORIGIN OF THE SERER 
i hey also probably came from the Upper Nile. Accord¬ 
ing to Pierrct’s dictionary, Serer in Egyptian would mean "he 
who traces the temple.” That would he consistent with their 
present religious position: they are one of the rare Senegalese 
populations who still reject Islam. Their route is marked by 


MIGRATIONS AND FORMATION OF PEOPLES 
ZZJ 
the upright stones found at about the same latitude from 
Ethiopia all the way to Sine-Salum, their present habitat. This 
seems to be substantiated by an analysis of the article by Dt. 
Maes on the upright stones of the French Sudanese village of 
Tundi-Doro, previously discovered by Desplagnes. 
Dr. Maes attributes the origin of these stones, on the 
basis of pure hypothesis, to Carthaginians or Egyptians. He 
analyzes the name of the village as follows: fundi would come 
from the Songhai meaning stone, Daro from the Arabic dar 
meaning house. So lundi-Daro would he “stone house.” This 
analysis would be valid and acceptable only if these stones 
represented houses, or if one could find that, in one way or 
another, they suggested houses. But this is not the case; they 
are described as follows: 
They are monoliths cut in the shape of a phallus, usually 
with the head (glaus) well delineated, the grooves follow the 
lines of the glans, and the pouch is depicted by rounded bulges 
whose longitudinal folds resemble those of the scrotum. Other 
smaller stones arc not phallus-shaped. Deprived of rounded 
protuberances, with the triangle outlined in the lorm of a pubis, 
by the union of the lower two-thirds with the upper third they 
seem instead an attempt to represent the female organ.12 
The author thinks this might have been a cemetery. That 
would seem likelv if any bones were found beneath the stones; 
but there are none. The author himself recognizes this prob¬ 
lem. 
The stones might rather be linked to an agrarian cult; 
they symbolize the ritual union of Sky and Earth to give birth 
to their daughter, Vegetation. According to archaic beliefs, 
rain was the water impregnating the Earth (Mother-Goddess) 
sent down by the Sky (Father-God, a celestial God who be¬ 
came atmospheric with the discovery of agriculture, according 
to Mircea Eliade). The vegetation that grew out of this union 
was a divine product; whence the idea of a Cosmic trinity. 


P RE COLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
2.26 
which, through a scries of successive incarnations, would 
evolve into the Christian Trinity of Father, Son, and Virgin 
Mary (later replaced by the Holy Spirit), by way of the Triad 
Osiris-Isis-Horus. Same must produce same; therefore, they 
carved in stone the two sexual organs so as to invite the 
divinities to couple and bring about the growth of the vegeta¬ 
tion that supported the life of the people. Thus, it was the need 
to insure his material existence which drove man to such 
practices. The vital impulse, in archaic materialism, could be 
expressed only in this transposed form, disguised as meta¬ 
physics. 
The present inhabitants of the Tundi-Daro region are not 
responsible for the erection of these stones, nor are their 
ancestors, according to the author’s research. We can there¬ 
fore assume that the Serer-Wolofs, before Islamization, went 
through such a stage. The Serer still have the same cult of the 
upright stones. In Bakri’s time, the inhabitants of the upper 
Senegal River planted pestles which were used as altars for 
libations and were called in the vocabulary of the times dek- 
kur (dek in Wolof meaning anvil, and bur, pestle), but deft 
could also be taken to mean altar, in the sense of a receptacle, 
which is indeed its basic meaning. But the analysis of Tundi- 
Daro in Wolof is even more interesting; fund = hill, daro = 
sexual union, in the ritual sense. This was euphemistic. The 
vowel i makes it plural. Tundi-Daro, 111 present-day Wolof, 
means precisely hills of union. That is so, because these rites 
took place on high places, mountains, or bills, considered 
sacred because they represented the point at which sky and 
earth seemed to touch; the idea of the center of the world, as 
in Jerusalem, the Kaaba of Mecca, the Sacred Mountain of the 
Mongol shaman. 
This idea is corroborated by the fact that the village of 
Tundi-Daro does indeed-stand against hills of reddish sand¬ 
stone. The excavations so far done in the area confirm the idea 
to the extent that the tombs (tumuli) studied are not of too 


MIGRATIONS AND FORMATION OF PEOPLES 
2.2.7 
recent date in relation to the Serer migration. The latter’s 
funeral materials and burial rites were the same as those of the 
ancient Egyptians and the emperors of Ghana: the deceased 
was buried, more or less luxuriously depending on the wealth 
of the family, and laid on a bed; around him were disposed all 
the usual domestic objects he used in daily life, and even a 
rooster to wake him in the morning. He was probably even 
mummified in the beginning, for apart from Angola, where 
mummification is still practiced, wc know from Sadi that 
Sonni Ali, the Songhay sovereign who was closest to the old 
pre-Islamic traditions, was mummified.M 
It should then be possible through further digs to find the 
road followed by the Serer from the Upper Nile. I he sacred 
city of Kaon, which they founded on arrival in the Sinc-Salum, 
seems to have been a replica of a city of the same name in 
ancient Egypt. We know that there are even Egyptian hiero¬ 
glyphic texts called “from Kaon," because they came from that 
city. I lte Serer heavenly god, whose voice was the thunder, was 
called Rog, which is often complemented by Sen, a national 
epithet, typically Serer. Rog suggests Ra. Sar is also a widely 
used Serer name: it designated the nobility of ancient Egypt. A 
linguistic variant of the same word, San, designated the no¬ 
bility of the Sudan, whence San-Korc, which was the neigh¬ 
borhood of the nobles in the city of Timbuktu, where the 
famous university-mosque of Sankore was built. We know that 
some Pharaohs of the Third Dynasty had the name of Sar, 
whereas Fer-ib-Sen and Osorta-Sen (Sen wart = Sesostris; 
were Pharaohs respectively of the First and Sixteenth Dynas¬ 
ties. The Egyptians die! not have family names in the present- 
day sense: all the added names they assumed could thus be 
translated, such as Sen1 ^ meaning brother. But we know that 
modern names also derive from similar expressions which 
have been more or less disguised: thus, the French Dupont 
(du-pont) is the man from the bridge, Duval (du-val) the one 
from the valley. 


228 PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
ORIGIN OF THE AGNI (ANi) 
The name of this people as a whole is reminiscent of Anu 
or Oni, which was the title of Osiris in The Book of the Dead, 
the epithet constantly applied to him. Almost all Agni kings 
have the title or surname of Anton, the Egyptian god of 
humidity, which is found everywhere in West Africa, whence 
the significant title of Marcel Griaulc’s book, Amtna, Dieu 
ij’Eait des Dogom (Amnia, Water-God of the Dogons). 
Thus, there was Ammon Azenia in the sixteenth century, 
Ammon Tifu in the seventeenth, A son of this king was 
brought before Louis XIV, who treated him with distinction, 
Ammon Aguire, who reigned in the nineteenth century, signed 
a treaty of alliance with King Louis-Philippe of France, One is 
therefore inclined to believe that the Agni as well were orig¬ 
inally from the Nile basin.15 
ORIGIN OF THE FANG AND BAMUM 
D.P, de Pedrals, in ail article published in December 
1951, relates that hr. Trilles, after a series of studies, came to 
the conclusion that the Fang had had some contact with 
Ethiopian Christianity during their early migration: in the last 
century, they had not yet gotten as far as the Atlantic coast. So, 
their migration must have been relatively recent. 
Similar studies by M.D.W. Jeffreys point to a connection 
between the Bamum and the Egyptians, Pcdrals writes: 
Having noted in several bonks on Egypt the vulture-pha¬ 
raoh and serpent-pharaoh relationships, and especially the fact 
pointed out by Diodorus: that the Ethiopian and Egyptian 
priests kept an asp curled up in their hats; having also noted 
various examples of zoomorphic two-headed representations, 
particularly in The. Book of the Dead {Am papyrus), folio 7, 
M.D.W, Jeffreys declared hirnself convinced that “die Bamum 
cult of the king derives from a similar Egyptian cult/16 


MIGRATIONS AND FORMATION OF PEOPLES 
Ziy 
These facts also bear sonic resemblance to the existence 
of the royal vulture of Cayor, called Gcb, which was also the 
Egyptian name for Earth, the reclining god. 
FORMATION OF THE WOLOF PEOPLE 
In Africa* totemic clan names are, to an extent, an ethnic 
indication; thus, the totemic names of Fall, Diagne, Diouf, 
Faye, Sar, and so on, are typically Serer. If a Serer lias a totemic 
name other than one of these, his foreign extraction leaves no 
doubt in the minds of his fellow Serer. 
The Tuculor, although crossbred, have equally charac¬ 
teristic totemic names: Wane, Kane, Diallo, Sy, Ly, and so on, 
IVul names are essentially Ka and Ba; where Sow is more 
likely to be l.aobe. Toure is a Songhai name; Cissc, a Sarakolc 
name, and so on. Yet the Wolofs have no other totemic names 
than these, while recognizing that they are danic names typ¬ 
ical of the abovementioned peoples. Beyond these names, 
there are other Wolof names which are of Sara or Congolese 
origin. 
Southern Congo 
Senegal: Wolof 
Balia 
Balia: a mans proper name 
Dia 
Dia 
Mbcnguc 
Mbengue 
N’Goma 
NXIoma 
tsTGom 
tsTGom 
licmba 
Bamba: a mans proper 
name 
Ngumbu 
Ngumb 
Chita 
Si I la 
Lua 
Lo 
Suku 
Sugu 
Bas 
Bas 
Chil 
Syll 
I fog 
Sog 
M’Backc 
M’Baeke 


230 PRECOLON IA I. ili.ACK Al'RICA 
Northern Congo 
Senegal; Wot of 
M’Backa-Waka 
M’Backe-Wake 
Bassa 
Bassa 
Mbo 
Mbow 
Maka 
Make: name of a city 
Rama 
Rama: womans proper 
name 
Ndumbe 
Mandumbe: mans proper 
name 
Kandc 
Kandc 
Ngu ma 
Nguniba: name of a city 
Eastern Sudan 
Senegal: Wolof 
Wadda 
Wadd 
Wadda: man’s proper 
name 
Gabu 
Ngabin name of a Baol 
village 
M’Bai 
M’Bai 
N’Dam 
N’Dam: village name 
recalling a cl ante name 
Busso 
Busso 
Guirnii 
Guermi: a noble, a 
member of the ruling 
dynasty 
Banda 
Banda: man’s proper name 
Gulai 
Gulai: man’s proper name 
Sara 
Senegal: Wolof 
M’Bai 
M’Bai 
Lai 
Lai 
N’Dam 
N'Dam 
Kaba 
Kaba 
Bua 
Ba 
Busso 
Busso 
Babuas 
Babu 
MBacka-Waka 
M’Backe-Wake 


MIGRATIONS AND FORMATION OF PEOPLES 
1 $ I 
Central Sudan 
Senegal: Wolof 
Keba 
Kebe 
Mandara 
Manga r a 
Falli 
Fall 
M’Bum 
M'Buh 
Kare 
Kate 
Kano: name of 
Kane 
a city 
Dukon 
Djuk 
Dien 
Dieng 
C had 
Senegal: Wolof 
So: legendary 
Sow (Laobe) 
people of the 
Sao 
Ivory Coast 
Senegal: Wolof 
Lo 
Lo 
Sierra Leone 
Senegal: Wolof 
Mende 
Mendi 
I he original habitat from which these clans emigrated 
was the Nile basin* Indeed, we can find there the same proper 
names as quoted above: these totemic names are taken from 
the book, African System of Kinship and Marriage, edited by 
A.R, Radcliff-Brown and Daryl) horde (International African 
Institute, Oxford University Press)* 
Totemic Clan Names Senegal: Wolof and Others 
of the jNuer 
Duai N'Diaye (which would seem to 
question the authenticity of the 
legend of N'Diadian N'Diaye) 
Diop (N'Diaye and Diop would seem 
to he the only authentic Wolof 
names before intermarriage l7) 
1 i op/Duob 


Z}2 PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
Nyang 
Yan 
Lam 
Gik 
Puok 
foie 
Tai 
Nyanyali 
Mar 
Lu 
Gom 
Deng 
Gak 
Gai 
Bath 
Tot emit Clan names 
of the Niter 
Banyge 
Ngony 
Garang 
Lath 
Lath jo r 
[ 'hiep 
Tul 
Nyagen 
Dar 
Thon 
Kan 
Ci 
Wan 
Lith 
Nyang 
Yan 
Lam 
Gik 
Puy 
Tai 
Nyangyali 
Mar 
Lo 
N Gom 
Djak/Gak 
Gai 
Bas 
All Wolof 
totemic 
proper names 
Totemic names 
common to Sara, 
Congolese, and 
Wo lots 
Senegal: Wolof and others 
M'Banygue: Wolof man's proper name 
Ngone: Wolof woman’s proper name 
Garang; Wolof man's proper name 
Lat: Wolof totemie name 
Fay: Serer and Lehou totemic name 
Latjor: Wolor man's proper name 
Thier: Baol village name 
Tul: Wolof village name 
Nyangen: Nyang village 
N’Dar: cirv name 
# 
Thinn: Wolof totemic name 
Kane 
Sy 
Wann 
Ly 
Tuculor totemic 
names 
We must remember that the Nuer live in the Nilotic 
Sudan, in the very basin of the Upper Nile, 
I hese two lists of comparative proper names are more 
instructive than many pages of literature; while very in¬ 
complete, they give an idea of how the African continent was 
peopled. Starting from the Nile basin in successive waves, the 
populations radiated in all directions* Some peoples, such as 
the Serer and the Iuculor, seem to have gone directly to the 


MIGRATIONS AND FORMATION OF PEOPLES 
233 
Atlantic Ocean, while others stopped in the Congo Basin and 
the region of the Chad, with the Zulus going as far as the 
Cape. 
The Congolese populations, Sara and Sara-kole (who 
would seem to be only a crossbred tribe of Sara), would then 
later migrate toward the West, flowing down into the Cayor 
and Baol plains occupied by the Serer, and especially into the 
Djoloff. 
The fact that in what was once French West Africa the 
name of the primitive totemic clan should still be borne by 
isolated individuals lost in a heterogeneous mass, corresponds 
ro a relative emancipation of the individual from the primitive 
community. In fact, successive migrations finally disintegrated 
that fraction of the clan which had broken away from the 
mother branch. 
The Tarikh es Sudan mentions the tribe of the Wolofs 
(Djoifs) and describes their virtues; it also mentions the exis¬ 
tence of a tribe called Adior (Adjor).lN 
But Sadi must certainly have related these facts on the 
basis of hearsay, for the Wolofs, despite what he thought, were 
not Peuls: the review of ethnic names proves that; so do then- 
languages. 
Likewise, the Adiors (inhabitants of the Cayor) were not 
Berbers: Adior and Wolof are one and the same thing, which 
Sadi had no idea of. The Adior are one of the blackest peoples 
of Africa. Their language, Wolof, has no connection whatever 
with Berber. 
According to the Tarikh el Fettach, an Israelite minority 
also lived in the bend of the Niger (region of lendirma), and 
had made a specialty of cultivating vegetables watered with 
fresh well water instead of river water. !'his event must have 
been within the first millennium of the Hegira, but the date 
cannot be determined with precision.19 
The Askias and Sonnis are of the same origin. They arc 
neither Berbers nor Yemenites, but originate in the Upper 
Senegal, according to the investigation made by Kati at the 
time. 


234 
V’RliCOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
The father of Askia Mohammed was named Arlum Silla 
and came from the city of Silla on the Upper Senegal. His 
mother, Kassai, was also an autochthon.20 Sonni Ali also 
came from the Upper Senegal. Ber—his surname reminds one 
of M’Bcr (champion) in Wolof—was the first emperor to take 
the title of Dali, which is the equivalent of Caesar in the 
African tradition.21 
n o r a s 
i. The Carthaginians deliberately falsified their travel narratives so as to 
mislead competitors; they scuttled their ships rather than yield their 
maritime secrets to the Ramans. 
l, D.P. de Ped ra! s, op. dLt civ. X, 
3, Budge, Egyptian Sudan (London, 1907). 
4, A1 Bakri, op, at,, pp. 342-343. 
5, |. Olumide Lucas, the Religion of the Yarn has (Lagos: CMS, Book¬ 
shop, 194 8). 
6, Dedrals, op. at., p. 107 (cf. map of Africa made by Cononelli in 1689). 
7, Delafosse, Les Noirs d'Afrique, op, cit 
H. Moret, Le Nile et la Civilisation egyptieme, p. 212. 
9. T, l\t ch. V, pp. 8 3-84. 
10. T. S.s eh, XIl, pp- 109-1 io, 
1 t, A. R. Raddiff-Brown and Daryll Forde, African System of Kinship and 
Marriage (International African Institute, Oxford University Tress), 
12, Dr. Maes, Pierres levees de Toundi-Dar (Bui. Com. Et. A.O.F., 1924), 
p. j 1. 
13, 7', $*t ch. XN, p. i 16. 
14. Hedj dk 1 sen meant “favorites and brothers"’ in Wolof originally; with 
evolution, it now means “his favorites and others.” Sen has now become 
the opposite of brother, a secondary character. 
13, Encyclopedic mensnelle d’outre-mery April 1952, vol. 1, sect. 20. 
16, Idem,, December 1951, pp. 347-349. 
17. This conforms to the fact rhat NDiayc and Diop arc the only gamu or 
kol; that has to do with the kinship resulting from marriages contracted 
over long periods of time between two exogam ic clans. 
18. 7. S., pp. 38, 117-119. 
19. /’. F.} p, 119. 
20. T. K, pp. 17, 94> 1 14* and 1 S[ • 
21. 7' F,P ch. V, pp. 83-84. 


Postface 
The French edition of this book contains an eleventh chapter entitled 
"Linguistic Appendix/’ that has been eliminated from the present 
edition as being far too technical to interest the general reader. 
The Appendix is devoted to a presentation, without the applica¬ 
tion of any hypotheses, of certain gramatical facts* Were the forma¬ 
tion of abstract nouns, diminutives, plurals, and so on m French not 
already fully studied, it would be necessary to carry out just such a 
study in order to complete our understanding of French grammar 
and elicit the genius of the language. 
If, as a result of that study, it were found that the rules estab¬ 
lished recurred almost without change in other Indo-1 European lan¬ 
guages in a systematic fashion, this would lead to the conclusion 
that there was a fundamental kinship within the language group. 
Such a conclusion would have been reached without requiring de¬ 
batable linguistic hypotheses, simply on the basis of presentation 
without comment on the linguistic elements. A mere glance at the 
results would have been sufficient to show that we were on solid 
ground. 
We have undertaken a similar study concerning Wolof, Serer, 
Peul-Tuculor, and Sara. 
In attempting to complete the Wolof grammar beyond what had 
already been done (Hr. (my Grands Gram main* which is apparently 
the most complete treatment of the subject to date), we were able to 
establish rules tor the formations of substantives, abstract nouns, 
diminutives, and plurals, as by the change of an initial consonant. 
We also made a wry complete study of the lingering question of 
“class languages' and their verb forms. We found that the same laws 
recurred in Serer, IVul (and Tuculor). Whence, rules which permit 


PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
23 6 
the passage from one ol these languages to the others in a systematic 
fashion. 
But it is the study of these "‘class languages’1 that truly led to the 
revelation of the genius of African languages of this type* The con¬ 
clusions drawn therefrom then have sociological and ethnological 
significance, to the extent that they allow us to use the language as a 
basis for understanding the mentality of the people. 
Those readers wishing to delve further into this aspect of the 
subject are advised to refer to the revised French edition, UAfrique 
Noire precoloniale, published by Presence Africaine* 25bis rue dcs 
Eeoles, 75005 Paris, France. 
Note: f he author had proposed the holding of five col lot] ua, within the 
framework of the UNESCO project of General History of Africa, to carry 
forward African research; 
1, “The Peopling of Egypt" 
z. “Deciphering of Mcroitic Writing" 
3. “Migrations, Toponyms, and Ethnonyms" 
4. 4 Specific Causes of the Detachment of the Iberian Peninsula at the Dawn 
of Modern Times" and 
5. “Air Cover of Africa/1 
The firsr four of these have been held. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 
ABULFEDA. Geographic, translated by Rem ami. Paris, 1848, 
ALVAREZ D'ALMADA. Ira it e succinct stir les rivieres de Gurnee et 
du Cap Vert. , , , 84, Oporto, 1841* 
BAKR1, AL See Bekri, EL 
BARBOT, Histoire de la Guinee. Paris, 1660. 
BARTH, H. Travels ami Discoveries in Northern and Central Af¬ 
rica, 5 vols, London, 1855. 
BASSE'!', R. Essai sur I'histoire et la langue de Vombouctou et des 
Royaumes Songhai et Mdie Louvain, 1889. 
BAUMANN, A. & WESTERMANN, D. Les Pettples et les Civilisa¬ 
tions de I A friepug translated by L. Horn burger. Paris: Ed. 
Payot, 1947* 
BEKRI, EL* Description de PAfrique septentrionalet trans. Slanc. 
Algiers: Typographic Adolphe Jourdan, 1913* 
-. Notes sur le pays des Noirs. 
BONNEL DE MEZ1ERES, A. 4 Recherehes de I'emplacement de 
Ghana,” in Memoires presentes par divers savants a I'Aca- 
demie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettrest vnL XIIL Paris, 1920. 
BUDGE, E.A.Wi Egyptian Sudan* London, 1907. 
CAILLE, Rene* Journal d3un voyage a 1'ombouctou, 3 vols. Paris, 
18 ^o* 
CA1LLIAUD, F. Voyage d Meroe, au Pie me btanc, au-dela de 
Fdzoql, dans le Midi du Royaunte de Sennar. Paris: Imprimerie 
Royale, 1 826, 
CHERUBINI, S* La Nubie. Paris, 1878. 
CORO NELLI. Map of Africa* 1689* 
DAN FODIO, Cheikh Otmane, Nottr eLEulbab, Algiers, r898. 
DELAFOSSE, M. Haut-Senegal—Niger, ^ vols. Paris: La rose, 191:3* 
237 


238 PRECOLONIAL BLACK AFRICA 
Les Hoirs de VAfrique. Paris: Payot, 1912. 
DES CHAMPS, Gov. H. Les Religions africaines. Paris: P.U.F., 1950. 
DESPLAGNES, Louis. L e Plateau Central nigerien. Paris: Latosc, 
1907. 
DEVIC, L.M. /•£' Pays des Zendjs ou la Cote orientale d'Afrique au 
Moyen-Age, d’apres les icrivains arabes. Paris, 1883. 
DIETERI.EN, G. Religion des Bambara. Paris; Payot, 1949. 
DIODORUS SICULUS. / listoire universe lie, irans. Abbe Tcrrasson. 
Paris, 1758. 
EDRISSI. Description de VAfrique et de PKspagne. Leiden, 1866. 
(See Idrisi.) 
Encyclopedic mensuelle d’Outre-Mer. December 1951; April 1952. 
PRO BEN JUS, l .eo. I listoire de la civilisation africaine, nans. Dr. 11. 
Back & D. Ermmit. Paris: Gallimard, 1938. 
-. Mythologie de I'Atlantide, trans. Gidon. Paris: Payot, 
1947. 
PUSTEL DE COULANGES, Nunn Denis. The Ancient City, trans. 
Willard Small, 1873. New York: Doubleday Anchor reprint, 
n.d. 
GAFFAREL, P. b.udoxe de Cyzique et le peripte de VAfrique dans 
VAntiquite. Paris, 1872. 
GHARNATI. Route de Carthage, trans. Beaumier. Paris, i860. 
GHYKA, Matila. Le Nombre d’Or. Rites et rytbmes pythagoriciens 
dims te developpenient de la civilisation occidentale. Paris: 
Gallimard, 1976 reprint edition. 
GRENIER, A. L es Religions etrusque et romaine. Paris: I’.U.L, 
Mana collection, vol. 3, 1948. 
GRIAULE, M. Dieu d'eati. Paris: Ed. du Chfine, 1948. 
HACQUARD, A. Monographic de Tombouctou. Paris, [900. 
HAM1DUL1.AH, M. “L’Afrique decouvre PAmerique avant 
Christophe Colomb’’ in Presence Africaine. Paris, Feb.—May 
1938, No. XVIII-X1X. 
HERODOTUS. The Histories of Herodotus, trans. Henry Cary. 
New York: Appleton, 1899. 
HOMBURGER, L. Les Langues ncgro-africaines et les peuples qui 
les patient. Paris: Payot, 1947. 
!BN BATTUTA. Voyage au Soudan, trails. Slanc. Paris, 1843. 
IBN HAUKAL. Routes et Royaantes (Description de VAfrique), 
trans. Slanc. Paris, 1842. 
IBN KHALDUN. Histoire des Berberes et des dynasties mus- 


B1 HI IOCRAPHY 
M9 
uhnanes de PAfrtque Septentrumale, trails. Slant1. Algiers: Gov¬ 
ernment Pnntshop, 1 K ^ 4 % 4 vols. 
-Prolegomenes historiques, trans, Slant , \ vols. Paris, 1868. 
IDRIS1. Idrissi geographe§ trails. A. [aubert. Paris: Royal Prinishop, 
1836. (See also Edrissi.) 
[ASPAN, M.A, ‘'Negro C ulture in Southern Africa Before European 
Conquest,” Science and Society, voL XIX, no, Summer 
1955' 
JEANNEQUIN DF. ROCHEFORT Voyage de Ubye au Royatam 
de Senegal* Paris, 1642, 
[GSEPHUS. Ol.nvres completes. trails. Buchon. Paris, 1 K4^, 
JOUENNK, Dr. “Les Monuments illegal ithiques Jli Senegal," in 
Amtuaire et Memoires du comite deludes historiques et scietu 
tiftques de /7LO,/\ Goree, 1916-1917. 
KA I I, Mahmud. Lartkh eldettach, trails. O. Goudas dk M, De- 
lafosse. Paris, 1911 (republished, Paris: A, Maisonneuvc, 1981), 
l.ABAT. Nouvelle relation de VAfnque Occidental s vols. Pans, 
1728. 
LABOURET “Le Mystere des ruines du Lobi," in Revue t Veth- 
nograph ie et des traditions pop id a ires, Paris, 1920. 
LE CHA1EUI K, A. L'lslani en A,OJ\ Paris, 1899, 
IT HERISSE, I 'Anden Royaume du Dahomey, Paris, 1911. 
1 £NORMAN!( E litstoire ancienne de rEgypte. 
- —. llistoire ancienne des Phenu ietts, Paris, Ed. Levy, 1890. 
LEO AFRICAN US. Description de PAfrique, nans, lemporal, \ 
vols. Paris, 1896-1 8 9 8, 
LI RObCiOURI IAN, Andre. Milieu et iecbniqnes. Evolution et 
Techniques, Paris, Albin Michel, 1945. 
—. IP Homme et la Matiere, Paris: Albin Michel, 1943, 
-Archeotogie du Pacifique NonL Paris, 1946* 
-— ik POIRIER, Jean, Ethnofogie de I'Union fran^aise, vol. 1, 
“AfriqueT Paris: PILE, 1953. 
LUCAS, ]. Olmnide. the Religion of the Yorubas. Lagos: CMS 
Bookshop, 1948. 
MAES, Dr, J. “Pierres levees de loundCDarT in Hull. Com, Et. 
A. () J\, 1924. 
MANU. the Laws of Mamt, trails, from the Sanskrit by George 
Biihlcr. Oxford: C lareudon Press, j 866 (reprinted, New York: 
Dover Publications, 1969). 
MARX, Karl. Capital: A Critique uf Political l\conomyf trails, by 


PRECO LON 1A L B LAC K AFRICA 
Z40 
Samuel Moore &c Edward Aveling, ed* by Frederick Engels, 
reviewed and amplified according to the Fourth German Edi¬ 
tion by Ernest Untermann. Chicago: Kerr, 1915. 
MEVIL. Satnory. Paris, 1899. 
MONTEIL, Ch* Monographic de Djenne. Tulle, 1901. 
MORE F, A. Le Nil et la Civilisation egyptienne* 
MUNGO PARK. Travel in the Interior of Africa (1795—1797), 
London, 1799* 
PEDRALS, D.P. de* Arcbeologie de lAfrique Noire, Paris: Payot, 1949. 
PLINY THE ELDER. Histoire natureile, trails. E. Littre, z vols. 
Paris, i860* 
RADCLIFF-BROWN, Alfred R*, ed* African Systems of Kinship and 
Marriage. New York: Oxford University Press, 1 950, 
R1BARD, Andre. La Prodigieuse Histoire de PHumanite. Paris: Ed* 
du Myrte, Collection "Pour comprendre I'histoire," 1947. 
SADL Abdcrrahman es-. Tarikh es-Soudan, irans. O. Houdas, 
Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1900 (republished, Paris: A Maison- 
ncuve, 1981). 
ST RABO. The Geography of Strabo, trans* Horace Leonard Jones. 
Ca mbr idge: Harvard U n i versity 1 Yess. 
TAUXIER, Etudes soudainaises: Le Noir du Yatanga. Paris: 1 . 
La rose, 192,7* 
TEMPELS, Fr, Philosophic bantoue. Paris: Presense Africaine, 
1948. 
VAN SERTTMA, Ivan* They Came Before Columbus. New York: 
Random House, 1976. 
VIGNAUX, Paul. Le Pensee au Mayen Age. Paris: Armand Colin, 
1938. 
V1GONDY, Robert* Map of Africa, 1795. 
