 
5
 
Abstract
The tragedy of foreign aid is not that it didn’t work; it was never really tried. A group of well-
meaning national and international bureaucracies dispensed foreign aid under conditions in 
which bureaucracy does not work well. The hostile environment under which such aid agencies 
functioned induced them to organize a cartel that increased inefficiency and reduced effective 
supply of development services, frustrating the good intentions and dedication of development 
professionals. The cartel of good intentions allows rich country politicians to feel that they are 
doing all in their power to help the world’s poor, supports rich nations’ foreign policy goals, 
preserves a panoply of large national and international institutions, and provides resources to 
poor country politicians with which to buy political support.  In short, foreign aid works for 
everyone except for those whom it was intended to help, with results such as the aid agencies’ 
calculation that it takes $3521 in aid to raise a poor person’s income by $3.65 a year. The 
environment that created aid bureaucracies led those organizations to (a) define their output as 
money disbursed rather than service delivered, (b) produce many low-return observable outputs 
like glossy reports and “frameworks” and few high-return less observable activities like ex-post 
evaluation, (c) engage in obfuscation, spin control, and amnesia (like always describing aid 
efforts as “new and improved”) so that there is little learning from the past,  (d) put enormous 
demands on scarce administrative skills in poor countries.    Now rich countries have used their 
past lack of effort at assuring effective aid as an excuse to keep aid at paltry levels. Instead, to 
change this unhappy equilibrium, policymakers in rich and poor countries should experiment with 
decentralized markets to match those who want to help the poor with the poor themselves freely 
expressing their needs and aspirations. 
W O R K I N G P A P E R N U M B E R 4
M A R C H 2 0 0 2
( R E V I S E D M A Y 2 0 0 2 )
The Cartel of Good Intentions:
Bureaucracy versus 
markets in foreign
aid 
By William Easterly


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Cartel of Good Intentions: 
 
Bureaucracy Versus Markets in Foreign Aid 
 
 
May 2002 
 
 
William Easterly 
 
Center for Global Development 
Institute for Internatonal Economics 
 
Abstract:  The tragedy of foreign aid is not that it didn’t work; it was never really tried. A group 
of well-meaning national and international bureaucracies dispensed foreign aid under conditions in which 
bureaucracy does not work well. The hostile environment under which such aid agencies functioned 
induced them to organize a cartel that increased inefficiency and reduced effective supply of development 
services, frustrating the good intentions and dedication of development professionals. The cartel of good 
intentions allows rich country politicians to feel that they are doing all in their power to help the world’s 
poor, supports rich nations’ foreign policy goals, preserves a panoply of large national and international 
institutions, and provides resources to poor country politicians with which to buy political support.  In 
short, foreign aid works for everyone except for those whom it was intended to help, with results such as 
the aid agencies’ calculation that it takes $3521 in aid to raise a poor person’s income by $3.65 a year. The 
environment that created aid bureaucracies led those organizations to (a) define their output as money 
disbursed rather than service delivered, (b) produce many low-return observable outputs like glossy reports 
and “frameworks” and few high-return less observable activities like ex-post evaluation, (c) engage in 
obfuscation, spin control, and amnesia (like always describing aid efforts as “new and improved”) so that 
there is little learning from the past,  (d) put enormous demands on scarce administrative skills in poor 
countries.    Now rich countries have used their past lack of effort at assuring effective aid as an excuse to 
keep aid at paltry levels. Instead, to change this unhappy equilibrium, policymakers in rich and poor 
countries should experiment with decentralized markets to match those who want to help the poor with the 
poor themselves freely expressing their needs and aspirations. 
 
 
Weasterly@iie.com 
www.cgdev.org 
 
 
I am grateful to Robert Ayres, Nancy Birdsall, Rebecca Blank, Erik Bloom, William Cline, Susan 
Collins, Simon Evenett, Roberta Gatti, Amar Hamoudi, Ravi Kanbur, Devesh Kapur, Charles 
Kenny, Michael Kremer, Craig Neal, John Nellis, William Niskanen, Guy Pfeffermann, Lant 
Pritchett, S. Ramachandran, Martin Ravallion, David Roodman, Judith Tendler, Nic Van de 
Walle, and Dennis Whittle for helpful comments, exchanges of ideas, or references, some of 
which influenced me quite a bit, although none should be held responsible.  
 
 


 
2
Introduction 
Though the term “cartel” normally evokes images of greedy oil producers and 
murderous drug lords, another more benevolent set of institutions also meet the definition of 
cartel. The members of this cartel are the world’s leading foreign aid organizations, which 
constitute a near-monopoly relative to the powerless global poor.  
This state of affairs helps explain why the global foreign aid bureaucracy has run amok in 
recent years. Consider a poor person in the countryside of Ethiopia who wants to get a pothole (a 
hole more the size of a car than a pot actually) repaired in front of his house. The Ethiopian 
government looks to foreign aid for financing of public services. This poor person somehow 
communicates his desires to “civil society representatives” and/or non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs), who allegedly articulate his needs through the government of Ethiopia 
(itself dominated by one minority ethnic group) to the international donors.  The national 
government solicits a “poverty reduction support credit” (PRSC) from the World Bank (also 
known as the International Bank for Reconstuction and Development, or IBRD) and a Poverty 
Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) from the International Monetary Fund (IMF). These 
agencies have many competent staff that can make a difference, but they are often swamped by 
bureaucracy from above (see organization chart below). To get loans from the IMF and World 
Bank, the government completes a  satisfactory poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP), in 
consultation with civil society, NGOs, and other donors and creditors. The government prepares 
the PRSP in light of the fourteen-point Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF) of the 
World Bank.  The World Bank follows a series of internal steps to approve a PRSC, including the 
preparation of a Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), a pre-appraisal mission, an appraisal 
mission, negotiations, and Board approval, all in accordance with OD 8.60, OP 4.01, and Interim 
PRSC Guidelines. The government also seeks qualification for the Enhanced Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries (Enhanced HIPC) Initiative so that the new loan doesn’t simply go to service old 
loans. The creditors and the government conduct a debt sustainability analysis (DSA). HIPC, 


 
3
PRSC, and  PRGF require numerous reform conditions such as participation of the poor, poverty-
reducing government expenditure monitored through annual Public Expenditure Reviews (PERs), 
fiscal deficit targets, revenue mobilization targets, and structural reforms such as the Civil Service 
Reform Program (CRSP), implementation of a Financial Information Management System 
(FIMS) in government, financial sector reform in line with the Basel standards and the eleven 
areas of International Standards and Codes recommended by the IMF and World Bank, control of 
money laundering, and privatization, lowering trade barriers in ways governed by the World 
Trade Organization (WTO), perhaps by applying the “Integrated Framework for Trade-Related 
Technical Assistance to Least Developed Countries”. The PRSP may or may not include money 
that could finance road repair for this poor person, depending on the national development 
program (NDP) that forms part of the government’s Agricultural Development Led 
Industrialization (ADLI) strategy. The amount of money for road maintenance will depend on a 
prioritization of various needs for expenditure in a multi-year medium-term expenditure 
framework (MTEF). The thousand-page Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper Sourcebook of the 
World Bank provides guidance like the following for determining spending on road maintenance: 
The sector ministries prepare medium-term strategic plans that set out the sector’s key objectives, together 
with their associated outcomes, outputs, and expenditure forecasts (within the limits agreed upon by the 
Cabinet). These plans should consider the costs of both ongoing and new programs. Ideally, spending 
should be presented by program and spending category with financing needs for salaries, operations and 
maintenance, and investment clearly distinguished.1 
 
Meanwhile, if beleaguered Ethiopian government officials have any time left, the PRSP 
Sourcebook also suggests that they cost out all the various ways the government is making 
progress towards the International Development Goals (IDGs, also known as Millennium 
Development Goals or MDGs), which include targets for poverty, hunger, infant and maternal 
mortality, primary education, clean water, contraceptive use, AIDS, gender equality, and the 
environment. These were all on the agenda of world leaders who assembled for the UN 
                                                                 
1 Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper Sourcebook 


 
4
International Conference on Financing for Development in March 2002. Meanwhile, other 
international bodies will review the Ethiopian PRSP, such as the United Nations Development 
Program (UNDP), the African Development Bank (ADB), the Consultative Group to Help the 
Poorest, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the Food and 
Agriculture Organization (FAO), the World Trade Organization (WTO), the World Health 
Organization (WHO), the International Labor Organization (ILO), the European Union  (EU), the 
United Nations Children’s Education Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations High Commissioner 
for Refugees (UNHCR), as well as NGOs and the Development Assistance Group (DAG), which 
includes representatives of national aid agencies such as those from Austria, Belgium, Canada, 
Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, United Kingdom (DFID), and the United States (USAID).  If the international 
lenders and donors approve the PRSP and release new funds to the national government, then 
government will allocate the money in accordance with the NDP, ADLI, CRSP, MTEF, CDF, 
PRGF, PRSC, and PRSP, after which the money will pass through the provincial governments 
and the district governments, and the district government may or may not repair the pothole in 
front of the poor person’s house. Within the World Bank, the transport economist must try to 
convince the desk economist that a Road Maintenance Loan that would repair this particular 
pothole merits higher priority than some other project, like say an Education Reform Loan pushed 
by the education economist (see diagram for a rendering of the World Bank organization chart 
applicable to a typical African country).2  If the poor person is dissatisfied and wants to complain, 
he faces so many different organizations and such a complex hierarchy within each organization 
he is understandably at a loss. 
                                                                 
2 I had to arbitrarily shift some VPs from one Managing Director to another so they would fit in the chart, 
and to omit altogether such relevant managers as the Senior Vice President and Chief Economist (no 
offense intended). 


 
5
World Bank Organization Chart for a Typical African Country Client
Director General
Operations Evaluation
Auditor General
Director Institutional Integrity
Peace Professional
Conflict Resolution Unit
Sector Director
VP for Sustainable Development
Field Staff
Headquarters Anchor
Country Director
Citizens of African Country
African Country Government
Desk Economist
Poverty Reduction Unit #2
Sector Director, Poverty Reduction
VP for Africa
Managing Director
VP Poverty Reduction
Education Professional
Human Development#4
Riverblindness Professional
Riverblindness
Africa Sector Manager, HD
VP Human Development
Managing Director
Transport Professional
Transport Manager
Africa Manager, Private Secto
VP Private Sector
Managing Director
President
Board of Directors
Rich Nations' Governments
Citizens of Rich Countries
 
Why does the business of delivering foreign aid services to poor people in poor countries 
involve so much unproductive bureaucracy? It’s not that aid bureaucrats are bad; in fact many 
smart, hard-working, dedicated professionals toil away in the world's top aid agencies. But the 
perverse incentives they face explain the organizations’ obtuse behavior.  Bureaucracy works best 
where there is high feedback from beneficiaries, high incentives for the bureaucracy to respond to 
such feedback, easily observable outcomes, high probability that bureaucratic effort will translate 
into favorable outcomes, and competitive pressure from other bureaucracies and agencies.3 In 
short, bureaucracy works best when it functions something like a free market. 
                                                                 
3 There is a large literature that makes these common sense points. See especially Wilson 1989. The World 
Bank’s 2001 World Development Report on Institutions presented evidence that direct election of 
individual politicians, more political competition, and a free and independent media reduced bureaucratic 
corruption and improved public service delivery. Djankov et al. 2001 similarly finds that government 
domination of the media worsens social service delivery. La Porta et al. 1998 found that more democratic 
governments were more efficient and delivered more public goods, as were governments bound by 
common law rather than civil or socialist law (arguing that commo n law gives more voice to citizens).  
Kaufmann et al 2001 and Kaufmann et al 2002 show how bureaucracies in Bolivia with more citizen voice 
and more transparency deliver a higher quality and quantity of public services. Isham, Kaufmann, and 
Pritchett 1995 found that countries with civil liberties had higher returns on aid projects. Pritchett and 
Woolcock 2002 describe the failure of the bureaucratic model in public service delivery under unfavorable 
conditions in poor countries. 


 
6
All of these conditions are unfavorable in foreign aid. Foreign aid is approved by voters 
of rich country A, whose national government gives the money through its own aid bureaucracy 
and international aid bureaucracies to the government of poor country B, who in turn is supposed 
to make some effort to give the money to poor people in country B. The poor people in country B 
have little voice in their own government, much less a voice in the distant national aid 
bureaucracy, international aid bureaucracy, and political campaign in rich country A. The rich 
country aid bureaucracy and international aid bureaucracy, although well intentioned, have little 
incentive to hear poor people from country B who do not vote or form pressure groups in country 
A. The heartbreaking reality of aid isn’t so much that it didn’t work as that we in rich countries 
didn’t really care whether it did. 
Although a poor person in Ethiopia can easily observe a pothole outside his house, it is 
hard for a foreign aid agency to continuously observe how country B’s pothole prevalence. 
Moreover, it is very hard for aid bureaucracies to get constructive feedback from past mistakes, 
like financing a road full of potholes, because any admission of past failure is a threat to getting 
new aid resources to dispense in the future.  Additional bureaucratic aid agency effort at fixing 
potholes in country B will likely miscarry, given the absence of feedback and the dependence of 
the outcome on government officials and other agents in country B outside of the agency’s 
control. If poor countries are poor because of bad government and other collective action 
problems, then bureaucratic effort in those countries is less likely to succeed than in rich 
countries.  Finally competitive pressure on aid agencies is very limited, because for self-
preservation foreign aid agencies agree to coordinate their actions rather than compete, forming a 
“cartel of good intentions”. 
Cartels thrive when customers have little opportunity to complain or find alternative 
suppliers. For example, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) in it’s 
heyday in the 1970s could dictate terms to the customers; it was only when more non-OPEC oil 
exporters emerged that its power weakened. In the foreign aid business, customers (i.e., the poor 


 
7
citizens in developing countries) have few chances to express their needs yet cannot exit the 
system. Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) can only hold the aid institutions to task on a 
few high-visibility issues, like conspicuous environmental destruction or taking away the homes 
of indigenous people (thus the World Bank eventually cancelled its support for the Narmada dam 
project in India under pressure on both issues). Under these circumstances, even while the foreign 
aid agencies make good faith efforts to consult the clients, they remain accountable mainly to 
themselves. 
Bureaucracy in foreign aid evolved to face a hostile environment.  The resulting edifice 
of national and international bureaucracies has not provided services effectively to the world’s 
poor. Despite numerous attempts at reform, bureaucratic characteristics of foreign aid stayed 
remarkably persistent throughout its fifty year history. The tragedy is that bureaucracy captured 
foreign aid under conditions in which it didn’t work well. Rich country donors allowed this 
bureaucratic capture and then used it as an excuse to decrease aid, rather than enforcing service 
delivery to the world’s poor. This paper suggests that foreign aid move away from monopolistic 
bureaucracies to decentralized markets. One possibility is giving “aid vouchers” directly to poor 
people to increase competition, feedback, and accountability.  
A story of bureaucracy in foreign aid 
 
I will sketch out a story of bureaucratic behavior and then describe the actual history of 
foreign aid as a case study of this story.  There is a large economics literature on the theory of 
bureaucracy, principally started by Niskanen (1968, 1971), with good recent surveys by Niskanen 
(2001),  Moe (1997) and Wintrobe (1997).  There is also a rich literature on bureaucracy from 
other social scientists, of which the outstanding example is Wilson (1989). 
Niskanen’s model, which I give reflecting later amendments to which he agreed, 
postulated that a bureaucracy behaved like a monopoly firm facing a downward sloping demand 
curve for the quantity of bureaucratic services as a function of the “price”. The bureaucracy 
maximized the equivalent to firm profits, usually called the discretionary budget (total budget 


 
8
minus costs of producing the service). A larger net budget was associated with perks for the 
bureaucrats (or bureaucrats may genuinely care about their field and so maximize the budget it 
gets.) The bureaucratic monopolist equated marginal revenue to marginal cost, which tended to 
raise the price and restrict the quantity of services relative to the non-bureaucratic competitive 
outcome.  Hence, Niskanen’s model gave a simple explanation for bureaucratic inefficiency (high 
price relative to marginal cost) and under-provision of services. 
 
Subsequent literature challenged the Niskanen model on several grounds. First, the 
literature argued the political authorities had the power to design incentives that would give an 
optimal outcome, using a principal-agent framework.  Second, the literature pointed out that 
bureaucracies don’t usually have a monopoly in their area of responsibility – there are usually 
other competing agencies in the same area.  
Moe 1997 is right that the principal agent models are really more about the Congress, 
Parliament, or President than they are about bureaucracy.4 They seem less relevant for 
bureaucracies with less direct political oversight. For a multinational aid agency, there is a 
collective action problem among the multiple principals that inhibits designing an optimal 
principal-agent contract. Principal-agent theory says having multiple principals dramatically 
weakens the incentives for the agent (the international agency). Each principal will try to get the 
agent to pursue their objectives and neglect the other principals’ objectives; in the aggregate this 
weakens incentives on all objectives for the agent.5 Even for a national aid agency, the 
unobservable effort and outcomes and virtually nonexistent feedback from the intended 
beneficiaries makes designing the optimal principal-agent contract a formidable undertaking. 
                                                                 
4 “Too often, bureaucratic theories are really not pursued for what they can tell us about bureaucracy, but 
rather for what they can tell us about how much power Congress and other authorities have and what 
mechanisms they employ to get their way. Bureaucracy is treated as little more than a means to these more 
important ends and not as an institution worthy of intensive explanation in its own right.” 
 
5 For a review, see Dixit 2000 


 
9
On the competitiveness of bureaucracies, that likely varies across different types of 
bureaucracy and the environments in which they operate. Suppliers always like to collude, but 
competitive markets prevent it. Many American municipal bureaucracies face a competitive 
market because residents can vote with their feet.   However, other kinds of bureaucracies may 
collude if entry is difficult, punishing deviators from collective agreements is easy, and no legal 
obstacles prohibit collusion. Entry is more difficult in most bureaucracy than in private business, 
lessening one threat to stability of the collusion agreement. The ethic of bureaucratic behavior 
stigmatizes excessively competitive deviants (“rogue bureaucracies”), who are singled out for 
blame if anything goes wrong. Far from outlawing collusion among bureaucracies, governments 
often encourage it (“coordination” comes up in about every bureaucratic discussion).    
Bureaucracies may then form a cartel, and behave collectively like the net budget-maximizing 
monopolistic bureaucracy.  
Conditions in foreign aid make it likely that aid bureaucracies will collude even more 
than other bureaucracies. Aid agencies will operate as a “cartel of good intentions” Why? First,  
aid agencies maximize gross foreign aid net of operating costs. Maybe aid agency employees 
want the maximum perks possible, or maybe aid workers genuinely want more resources for the 
poor countries. Aid agencies garner more aid revenues by acting collectively, because they realize 
economies of scale in campaigning for aid revenues. 
Second, foreign assistance to poor states is a very difficult and risky business, as argued 
earlier – the causes of national poverty are many and the proven successes are few (not zero, 
though). The knowledge about how to achieve economic development is itself underdeveloped. 
The aid agency will have to work with local elites and problematic local government institutions 
who themselves may not have an incentive to see their society achieve poverty reduction. The 
feedback from the intended beneficiaries –the poor and voiceless –is not there to give guidance 
on what is working. The more severe these problems in a society, the more likely that it is a client 
of a foreign aid agency. Even worse, the aid agency will often be called upon for help just when 


 
10
an already difficult situation gets even worse – in a social and economic crisis. Probability of 
failure is high. The aid agency is in the unenviable position of being blamed for a likely bad 
outcome. Although rational evaluators could control for the difficulty of the environment, 
conditional evaluation requires inside knowledge that only the aid agencies themselves are likely 
to have – and of course they are not credible when they protest how hard their job is. 
Another element in the market power of aid agencies is that the typical agency forces 
governments seeking its money to work exclusively with that agency's own bureaucracy--its 
project appraisal and selection apparatus, its economic and social analysts, its procurement 
procedures, and its own interests and objectives. Each aid agency constitutes a mini-monopoly, 
and the collection of all such monopolies forms a cartel. 
Agencies handle the high risks in foreign aid by the time-honored bureaucratic strategy of 
sharing blame. The bureaucracies form a united front so evaluators don’t know who to blame for 
bad outcomes.  Monitors don’t know whether to blame the international aid community or the 
national recipient government for bad policies. They don’t know whether to blame bad economic 
design of aid programs, or bad politics that undermines their implementation. The monitors don’t 
know whether to blame the International Monetary Fund for excessive fiscal austerity that 
restricts funds for worthy programs, or the World Bank for failure to preserve high return areas 
from public expenditure cuts. Evaluators don’t know whether the IMF and World Bank are too 
tough or too lax in enforcing conditions, or if it is really the regional development banks are being 
too hard or easy in their conditions for aid. Monitors don’t know whether to blame the bilateral 
aid agencies for being influenced by foreign policy priorities, or the multilaterals for applying a 
“one size fits all” ideological program to all countries. This sharing of blame is a convenient 
equilibrium for all aid agencies together. The multiplicity of actors in the aid outcome reduces the 
probability of blame for any one actor. Hence, there is safety in numbers in the foreign aid 
business.   


 
11
Driving competitive foreign aid bureaucracies out of business doesn’t make sense since it 
increases the probability of blame for the remaining bureaucracies. Once a collusive agreement is 
in place, bureaucracies will not cheat on the agreement by supplying a larger quantity of foreign 
aid services at a lower price.  Such “rogue” bureaucracies are dangerously exposed to bearing 
solitary blame for their extra activities if they turn out to fail.  The higher is the risk of failure, the 
lower is the incentive to cheat and the higher the incentive to remain in the blame-sharing 
coalition.  
A similar blame-sharing story could explain why foreign aid bureaucracies collude to 
form a united front relative to a foreign aid recipient, rather than competing to satisfy the 
recipients’ needs. Any agency that “wins the contract” to service recipient X to the exclusion of 
its rivals becomes dangerously exposed to blame if anything goes wrong in X.  
The cartel of good intentions unites donor organizations with different objectives and 
agendas. This is nonetheless in their mutual interest, because advocates of one objective agree to 
support other objectives in return for support for their own cause (“log-rolling” in political 
economy terminology). Conversely, one aid agency will not criticize another agency’s 
interventions; the second will reciprocate such critical restraint.6 This collusion destroys 
information, since one aid agency knows more about bad performance of another agency than 
outside evaluators.  Overall critical evaluation of past aid efforts is suppressed by all agencies 
because it threatens the overall aid budget. Controlled group experiments, like those that made 
critical progress possible in medicine, are dangerous because they may generate negative 
publicity for the whole aid effort. Evaluation of individual interventions (like a particular method 
of agricultural extension) is forsworn in favor of unconditional support for a myriad of 
development efforts. The feedback from experimentation and learning by doing that is essential to 
success in any activity is therefore mostly absent. This robs the aid community of its historical 
memory. 


 
12
Thus, donors form a cartel out of the best of intentions.  They wind up raising the price 
and restricting the quantity of foreign aid services. Donors are thus immune from competitive 
pressure and can implement “supply-driven” aid programs. This may explain the inefficiency of 
foreign aid and for its disappointing output. 
Foreign aid bureaucracies also respond to this problematic environment by skewing the 
composition of their output in favor of items that are more observable to those outside the aid 
agencies. If outcomes were perfectly observable at zero monitoring cost, the median voter in a 
rich country would equate the relative marginal benefit of an aid service to its relative price. With 
costly monitoring to verify output, the relative marginal benefit of aid is equated to the relative 
price of aid services plus the marginal cost of monitoring. If monitoring has a higher marginal 
cost the lower is the ease of observation, then demand is lower for less observable aid services. 
So aid bureaucracies will define their outputs as much as possible in observable units.7 This 
includes observable outputs that the agencies produce for each other; collusion will suppress any 
complaints about the quality of such intermediate outputs. The cartel can threaten with public 
embarrassment any agency tempted to shift from producing visible low return outputs to invisible 
high return outputs, since the rogue agency will have little to show the public. Thus, even 
agencies that would like to produce more invisible effective services are kept in the fold. The 
collective equilibrium is still an emphasis on observable output. 
Another response to the difficult environment is obfuscation. Aid agencies are more 
likely to use bureaucratese, acronyms, and misleading euphemisms than other less risky 
bureaucracies. However, there is a tradeoff to the bureaucracy -- more obfuscation lowers not 
only the probability of blame but also the observability of output, which lowers demand for the 
output as I have just argued. So the obfuscation will hide bad outcomes, while advertising good 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
6 This argument is inspired by Pritchett’s (2001) model of why “it pays to be ignorant.” 
7 Tirole 1994 has a principal-agent model that also delivers the prediction that government agencies 
producing multiple outputs will focus their efforts on the observable ones. Dixit also makes this point in a 
principal-agent framework. 


 
13
outputs. The aid community over-promises ex ante, then exaggerates the success ex post.  The 
marriage of obfuscation and advertising is “spin control.” Collusion enforces the use of “spin 
control.” A deviant agency that allocates too many resources to producing development services 
and too little to spin control will be vulnerable to public relations attacks by the other agencies. 
The aid process begins in an aura of emergency. Do something! Do anything! Do it right away! 
(Pressman and Wildavsky 1984) 
 
A history of foreign aid 
A convenient starting place for the history of foreign aid is with the Point Four program of Harry 
S. Truman, which he announced in his inaugural address on January 20, 1949: “We must embark 
on a bold new program for … the improvement and growth of underdeveloped areas. More than 
half the people of the world are living in conditions approaching misery… For the first time in 
history, humanity possesses the knowledge and the skill to relieve the suffering of these people.” 
I believe this was the first call for peacetime aid from one state to another in history. At the 
moment of birth, we have some characteristics of foreign aid that will last through the years – the 
call for a new program, the rationale in terms of poverty, and the optimism that foreign aid 
programs can make a big difference.  
A statement two years later by a group of UN experts was more precise: “a 2 percent 
increase in the per capita national incomes cannot be brought about without … a sum of money 
…of about $3 billion a year” (UN Expert Group 1951). This started a fashion of setting precise 
targets, calculating aid “requirements” to achieve this target, and then calling for an aid increase. 
So Walt Rostow in his famous Stages of Growth declared that “an increase of $4 billion in 
external aid would be required to lift all of Asia, the Middle East, Africa, and Latin America into 
regular growth, at an increase of per capita income of say, 1.5% per annum.” (Rostow 1960) This 
recommendation would have approximately doubled current aid spending. Rostow, like others at 
the time and for many years afterward, also aid was temporary, that only 10-15 years was needed 
before poor countries attained “self-sustaining” growth in which aid was no longer necessary. The 


 
14
model for these early efforts to calculate the aid requirement was the Harrod-Domar growth 
model: growth was proportional to investment, which was in turn financed by aid. Solow’s 1957 
article on growth had already discredited the Harrod-Domar model in the mainstream profession 
(as Domar himself acknowledged immediately, saying he had meant to model the business cycle 
rather than growth ), but the model lived on in the development literature (see Easterly 1997).  
The statements advocating increased aid continued: “existing foreign aid programs and 
concepts are largely unsatisfactory …we intend during this coming decade of development to 
achieve a decisive turnaround in the fate of the less-developed world, looking toward the ultimate 
day …when foreign aid will no longer be needed.” (John F. Kennedy 1961) “we recommend a 
substantial increase in official aid flows” (Pearson Commission 1969), “the current flow of ODA 
… is only half the modest target prescribed by the internationally accepted United Nations 
Strategy for the Second Development Decade” (World Bank President Robert McNamara, 1973), 
“additional concessionary resources would be required to achieve both higher rates of growth in 
the poorest countries” (World Bank, IDA-6, 1980), “A cut of just 10 percent in military spending 
by the countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization would pay for a doubling of aid…real 
growth in aid of only 2 percent a year is an unacceptably weak response to the challenge of global 
poverty” (World Bank WDR 1990).  
The idea of doubling current aid is still a popular rhetorical device in 2001: “If we are 
serious about ensuring a beneficial globalization and meeting multilateral development goals we 
have all signed on to, we must double ODA from its current level of about $50 billion a year.” 
(World Bank President James Wolfensohn, 2001) A World Bank technical study on the cost of 
meeting the international goals concurred on doubling: “An increase in foreign aid of an amount 
equal to current foreign aid … is about the right order of magnitude for achieving the 
development goals.” (World Bank 2002) 8  It’s all a little circular, however, as the World Bank’s 
                                                                 
8 To make this calculation, the World Bank technical study in 2002 was still using the Harrod-
Domar growth model 44 years after its demolition by Solow. 


 
15
Poverty Reduction Strategies Sourcebook said “Mobilizing resources is without doubt a primary 
function of targets set by the international donor community such as the International 
Development Goals.” 
The United Nations adopted the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs, also known as 
the International Development Goals) in a resolution on the turning of the new millennium. They 
were embraced by all the aid agencies, and set targets for reducing poverty, hunger, infant and 
maternal mortality, gender inequality, illiteracy, AIDS prevalence, and environmental 
degradation by the year 2015. The opening sentences of the UN Resolution said “We will spare 
no effort to make the United Nations a more effective instrument for pursuing all of these 
priorities. We resolve therefore:  To ensure that the Organization is provided …with the resources 
it needs to carry out its mandates.”9  
In the new year, the UN Conference on Financing for Development (the name says it all) 
in Monterrey, Mexico in March 2002 continues the tradition of focusing on volume rather than 
effectiveness of aid. UK Chancellor Gordon Brown currently calls for a new “Marshall Plan,” a 
common precedent invoked for needs from post-Soviet Bloc countries to Bosnia to Africa to 
Afghanistan. 
Aid mounted throughout the period when advocates called for an increase (Figure 1). It 
did indeed double several times from the early days to the present. If all foreign aid given since 
1950 had been invested in US Treasury Bills, the cumulative assets of poor countries by 2001 
would have amounted to $2.3 trillion. The World Bank’s administrative expenses went from $81 
million in 1959-60 to $1.5 billion in 1993-94 (in constant fy1993 dollars), while its staff went 
from 657 to 7,106 (Kapur et al. 1997) Meanwhile, the typical poor country has stagnated over the 
last two decades, and in many aid-intensive African countries for even longer. There have been 
individual success stories and progress on other indicators like infant mortality and  
 


 
16
 
Figure 1: Overseas Development Assistance  in 1999 billions of US$
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
1950
1952
1954
1956
1958
1960
1962
1964
1966
1968
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
school enrollment. But the goal of increased living standards and reduced poverty in the typical 
poor country was not attained. The decline in the 1990s reflects some aid weariness amidst the 
feeling that foreign aid created something much less than $2.3 trillion in productive assets.10  
Meanwhile, rich country politicians consoled themselves they had done all in their power 
for the world’s poor, instead of trying to change the bureaucratic edifice that led to poor results. 
Rich countries and aid agencies found it convenient to blame the governments of poor countries 
entirely for aid failures, as opposed to rich country politicking and malfunctioning donor 
bureaucracies. 
Coordination 
 
From the earliest days of aid, the emphasis of all participants has been on coordination 
rather than competition.  After reading the literature one can hardly say “aid” without adding 
“coordination”. President Truman signaled in 1949 that “this should be a cooperative enterprise in 
which all nations work together through the United Nations and its specialized agencies wherever 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
9 55/2. United Nations Millennium Declaration 
10 The report of the Meltzer Commission in March 2000 summarized many of the complaints about aid 
ineffectiveness. 


 
17
practicable.”  Two decades later, an aid commission repeated “A serious effort is necessary to 
coordinate the efforts of multilateral and bilateral aid-givers and those of aid-receivers.” (Pearson 
Commission 1969) The World Bank’s 1981 Berg report on Africa agreed that “Aid coordination, 
both within recipient countries and among major financing agencies, has been recognized as 
increasingly important…” (World Bank, 1981) Despite repeated calls for coordination, there was 
never enough: “donors must act more in concert – with each other and with recipients. This report 
suggests six ways to improve coordination.” (World Bank Africa report, 1986) “Better 
coordination among international financial institutions is needed.” (World Bank, IDA-12, 1998) 
“Deputies encouraged Management … to maintain close collaboration with other multilateral 
development banks (MDBs), the OECD-DAC Task Force on Donor Practices, the Strategic 
Partnership with Africa (SPA), the United Nations and its specialized agencies, and bilateral 
development assistance agencies. They also noted progress in strengthening partnerships between 
IDA and other development institutions…and welcomed the recently negotiated Memoranda of 
Understanding with the African, Asian and Inter-American Development Banks.” (World Bank, 
IDA-13, 2001) 
 
These continued calls for coordination illustrate first, that cooperation is desired over 
competition in foreign aid, and second, that cooperation is always a little out of reach. These are 
consistent with the natural tensions inherent in a cartel – that agencies formally forswear 
competition but at the same time always feel temptation to encroach on others’ turf.  
To give an example from another activity, we have statements like the following 
“representatives … meet … to co-ordinate and unify their … policies in order to promote stability 
and harmony”, progress was made through “the increased level of cohesion between Members,” 
the activity stands to benefit ”from the advances that have been made in the area of co-operation 
in recent years”, “to realize our increasingly reciprocal ambitions, a lot of hard work, 
compromises and true goodwill must come into play. Co-operation, not confrontation, is the best 


 
18
strategy for the betterment of our generations and posterity.” These are all statements from 
meetings over the last few years of the OPEC oil cartel.  
 
The “coordination” in foreign aid protects the smallest players in the business, even when 
dealing with them drives the poor countries’ governments to distraction.  One wonders if the 
transactions costs were worth the effort for the Senegalese government to receive 3,344 Euros 
from the Finnish Ministry for Foreign Affairs Department for International Development 
Cooperation in 2001,11 or how well Yasser Arafat is monitoring tenders in November 2001 for 
Consultancy Services for the Palestinian–Finnish Education Programme, Phase I.  As the World 
Bank (1998) said, “It is hard to explain this behavior, except that different donors like to “plant 
their flags”.”  
 
The multiplicity of donors impelled the aid community to call for centralization of aid  
and all other revenues by the recipient government:  
Negotiating an external assistance strategy in the context of the PRSP process that explicitly identifies 
the priority sectors and programs for donor financing… More detailed external assistance strategies can 
then be developed for key areas through sectoral working groups in which representatives of major donors 
and line agencies participate...Agreeing on financing priorities for individual donors within the 
framework of a global external assistance strategy, rather than through bilateral agreements… (World 
Bank Poverty Reduction Strategy Sourcebook, 2001) 
 
 
This asks recipient governments to do central planning, which even rich countries with far more 
administrative capacity than poor countries have a hard time doing (even without worrying about 
small grants from the Finnish Ministry for Foreign Affairs Department for International 
Development Cooperation). This asks the undermanned government of Ethiopia to decide where 
and whether a given pothole merits repairing, and then “coordinate” which amongst a sea of 
donors and programs will do the job.  
All of the classic criticisms of central planning – the vast information requirements, the 
oversimplification to quantifiable targets as opposed to the real subjective wants, the meeting of 
targets without regard to relative costs and benefits, the lack of feedback from local practical 
                                                                 
11 http://global.finland.fi/english/publications/annual/2001/annual_02appendices.pdf 


 
19
knowledge – apply with even more force in a poor country with poor institutions and under-
skilled civil service than in a rich country. 
 
Having the government bureaucracy even attempt to “coordinate” donors puts the aid 
community in a half-way house where they substitute monopoly for competition. First, the 
“cartel” enables donors to escape pressure for reduction of high costs. Second, the donors present 
a united front to the well-intentioned people in the rich countries who want to give money to 
people in poor countries, making it difficult for them to discriminate which among the donors is 
the most effective channel. Third, the donors impose an unequal relationship on the recipient 
government, who can only take or leave what the United Donors offer. Finally, the “cartel of 
good intentions” extends to include the local government bureaucracy, confronting the 
beneficiaries with a monopoly that is not always customer-friendly.  There are many reports like 
the one in Ukraine of “humiliation that one endures from government bureaucrats, infamous for 
their ferocious and insulting tone.” In Esmeraldas, Ecuador a group of villagers reported “The 
mayor even slapped a woman who asked for help.…” (Voices of the Poor 2000) Likewise, Filmer 
and Pritchett 2001 report “a client survey of women who had a birth in the past 2 years at rural 
health centers in the Mutasa district of Tanzania revealed the most frequently cited disadvantages 
of giving birth in an institution were: ridiculed by nurses for not having baby clothes (22 
percent)…and nurses hit mothers during delivery (13 percent).” We don’t have enough 
information on how representative such examples are.  Still, you could probably improve a 
system where the bureaucrats beat the beneficiaries.12 
 
Coordination also undermines the potential gains from specialization and division of 
labor among aid agencies. Competition forces firms to find a niche in which their firm has an 
advantage over others. Firms realize these gains by motivating their own employees to specialize 
                                                                 
12 Bureaucracies in rich countries where clients don’t have much voice could be equally oppressive, like 
Customs or Immigration in the US. The US government during the Clinton Administration tried to make 
various agencies more client-friendly. According to an anecdote by John Nellis, the response of Customs 
officials to this initiative was “we don’t have clients; we have suspects.” 


 
20
in narrow tasks. Countries, regions, and even city districts specialize in particular products, like 
Swiss watches, the carpet industry around Dalton, Georgia and the Manhatttan diamond district.13  
In contrast, aid organizations are notorious for trying to do it all. Even small bilateral aid 
agencies cover the whole spectrum of development topics, rather than focusing on a few. The 
IMF, World Bank, and regional banks all get involved in short-run financial crises, just as the 
IMF, World Bank, and regional banks all get involved in reducing long-run poverty. The aid 
agencies discourage staff from specialization – they prevent them becoming country experts by 
rotating them frequently among countries and regions.  Knowledge of local history, politics, and 
languages (outside of French, Portuguese, and Spanish, and not even always that) is rare on 
country desks in aid agencies.  
Ferguson 1994 has a devastating critique of a World Bank report on Lesotho. He lays 
bare the document as a generic product that got wrong the most elementary facts about Lesotho’s 
economy and history (for example, the report portrayed Lesotho as an exotic land untouched by 
the modern market economy, when in fact it had been integrated into the South African mining 
industry for more than a century). 
The result of all the donors doing everything is an incredible multiplicity of demands on 
the scarce administrative staff of the poor countries (more on this below).  Tanzania had to 
produce more than 2,400 reports a year for the donors, who sent the poor country 1000 missions a 
year.  (World Bank Africa Development Indicators 2002). 
 
Such an extreme outcome of duplicated services is sometimes taken as a sign that there 
IS market competition among donors. Multiplicity should not be confused with competition. A 
competitive market would not lead to such an outcome. Many fast-food joints compete to serve 
me lunch; I choose one. The joint next door doesn’t try to compel me to eat a second lunch. In a 
competitive market for foreign aid, one agency would “win the contract” to deliver a particular 
                                                                 
13 I once was looking for a restaurant in downtown Manhattan for several city blocks and saw numerous 
“restaurant” signs but went away hungry; I had blundered into a district that produced only restaurant 


 
21
service in a particular country, reducing rather than increasing the multiplicity of donors and 
projects. What is going on in aid is not competition among donors but many little monopolies 
operating simultaneously that tie disbursement of their money to the use of their bureaucracy. 
The monopolies have control of their own sources of funding (e.g. CIDA has money from the 
Canadian government, who are not going to give the money to the British DFID) and so don’t 
really compete for funding. Hence CIDA, DFID and other aid agencies have every incentive to 
coexist, hence the cartel of good intentions. 
A donor organization’s sense of mission, then, relates not necessarily to economic development but to the 
commitment of resources, the moving of money. … The estimates of total capital needs for development 
assistance in relation to supply seem to have been the implicit standard by which donor organizations have 
guided their behavior and judged their performance… the quantitative measure has gained its supremacy by 
default. Other definitions of success and failure of development assistance efforts have been hard to come 
by  (Judith Tendler 1975). 
 
 Redefining output 
The prediction of the story above is that aid bureaucracies respond to their high risk 
environment by producing observable outputs. Agencies redefine inputs to development as 
outputs. The primary output that foreign aid agencies advertise is the volume of money they 
disburse. This fits in with the campaign to estimate aid requirements of achieving certain goals.  
World Bank President McNamara bragged about loan volume: “we proposed to double 
the Bank’s operations in the fiscal period  1969-73 compared to the previous 5-year period 1964-
68. That objective has been met…In the five years we achieved a level of operations that 
exceeded the total of all the operations that the Bank has undertaken in the developing world in 
the 23 years from 1946 through 1968.” (McNamara 1973) Periodic IDA reports continued the 
stress on volume: “IDA lending to Sub-Saharan Africa rose from a level of $950 million in 
..FY80.. to over $1.2 billion in FY83, while the share of IDA going to Sub-Saharan Africa rose 
from 27 percent to 37 percent.” (World Bank 1983) As of the World Bank’s report on aid in 
1998, the stress on volume was said to have continued “Disbursements (of loans and grants) were 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
equipment. 


 
22
easily calculated and tended to become a critical output measure for development institutions. 
Agencies saw themselves as being primarily in the business of dishing out money.” The World 
Bank’s IDA continued to define itself in terms of volume in 2001: “IDA, as the largest source of 
concessional assistance to the world’s poorest countries, plays a critical role in their efforts to 
achieve growth and poverty reduction.” A World Bank publication in 2001 advertised ten 
accomplishments of the organization – all ten involved volumes of assistance for different 
purposes.14 Although voices have been raised throughout the years against “pushing loans” and 
“moving money,” and change may actually have occurred, the continuity of stressing aid volume 
is more noticeable than the changes. 
 
This emphasis on moving money had a number of consequences for the aid business.  
Since the weak institutions of the recipient were often the critical bottleneck in disbursing funds 
(more on this below), donors often substituted their own institutions for those of the recipient so 
as the keep the money flowing. As Tendler’s timeless 1975 study puts it: “much of the initiative 
and work involved in generating public projects in developing countries has been transferred 
gradually from its usual location – a country’s public sector institutions – to the lending 
institution.”  Twenty-two years later the World Bank’s 1998 aid report echoed this claim: “Faced 
with low implementation capacity and pressure to ‘move the money,’ aid agencies have a long 
history of attempting to ‘cocoon’ their projects using free-standing technical assistance, 
independent project implementation units, and foreign experts—rather than trying to improve the 
institutional environment for service provision.” A World Bank 2000 report on Africa made an 
even more dramatic claim, after discussing different groups excluded from the development 
process, “Africa’s governments are one of the excluded groups: with high aid dependence, in 
many countries development policy is seen as being the prerogative of donors rather than 
governments.” In Tanzania in the early 1990s, donors were implementing 15 separate stand-alone 
projects in the health sector alone (Van de Walle 2001). An aid worker reported to me that 
                                                                 
14 World Bank, Ten Things You Never Knew About the World Bank, 2001 


 
23
Honduras has 57 different projects in the education sector as of this writing, and that the 
impoverished country was “floating in aid money.” This is an example of what Tendler 1975 
called the paradoxical phenomenon of “aid abundance,” where donors want to give money faster 
than recipients can absorb it.  
 
The emphasis on moving money led to IFIs allocating too little effort to two important 
activities: (1) insuring that loan conditions were actually observed, and (2) ex-post evaluation of 
loan effectiveness. Loan conditions were not effectively enforced because the IFIs kept coming 
back to the same countries with “adjustment loans” with little regard for the performance on 
previous loans. There was no progress on economic reform indicators from one adjustment loan 
to the next in the same country (Easterly 2002). The World Bank and IMF gave Argentina 33 
adjustment loans over 1980-2001 during repeated macroeconomic crises, yet at the end Argentina 
went into an even more severe macroeconomic crisis than the previous ones (complicated by the 
huge debt now owed to multilateral institutions). 
Ex-post evaluation receives very low priority in World Bank activities; the Bank reviews 
only 5 percent of its loans after 3 to 10 years following the last disbursement for development 
impact (Meltzer Commission 2000). The World Bank has done client surveys since the mid-
1990s, but the results have not been made public and there seems to be little mechanism for 
having managers learn from them (Wade 2001).   Aid agencies rarely engage in controlled 
experiments of particular interventions, despite the small amounts required relative to loan 
volume. They also show little interest in improving the atrocious statistical systems of the poor 
countries so that the aid agencies or recipient governments would even be able to know what is 
happening to growth, poverty, or social indicators. Aid agencies rarely engage in primary data 
collection and do not even store for future use the (secondary) data contained in their own country 
reports.  
The Bush-Bono summit just before Mr Bush's announcement of more money for 
development exemplifies the photo-opportunity approach to development aid taken by most US 
presidents and politicians.(Moises Naim, Financial Times, April 1, 2002) 


 
24
Observable output 
 
The emphasis on safe observables leads to stress on other kinds of output as well, like 
international meetings of statesmen, glossy reports for the public, and the proliferation of 
framework and strategy papers. The standard response to any Third World tragedy is to hold a 
meeting about it. The World Bank evaluation of IDA activities in 1997 cited “the Interagency 
Task Force on an Enabling Environment for Social and Economic Development” that  “followed 
up on two key conferences held during IDA10: the Copenhagen Social Summit (March 1994) and 
the Fourth World Conference on Women (September 1995). During FY94-96 IDA chaired ninety 
formal meetings and provided substantial input to thirty-eight formal meetings chaired by other 
donors.” Likewise UNDP in a recent report discussed its success at arranging meetings: 
Trust Fund resources have been used to support the preparation and dissemination of social sector 
expenditure reviews in seven African countries…Five of these reports have already been finalized and a 
workshop has been or will be held to discuss their findings and recommendations. Preliminary findings of 
these studies were shared in three regional meetings, co-sponsored by UNDP and UNICEF, which served 
to sensitize policy-makers about the 20/20 initiative and prepare them for the international meeting which 
took place in Hanoi in October 1998.15 
 
IDA’s 2001 draft document discussed the interlocking strategies and frameworks 
produced by different aid organizations, with an output by one organization often serving as an 
input to another: “the UN Common Country Assessment, the Bank’s Economic and Sector Work 
(ESW), and the IMF’s analytical and technical assistance work would contribute to governments’ 
analytical base for PRSPs {Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers}. {IDA Deputies} also welcomed 
the European Union’s decision to base its Africa, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) assistance 
programs on the PRSPs.” In 2002 alone, the All-World Summit Tour includes the Monterrey 
Conference on Financing for Development, The Kananaskis16 G-8 Summit on Africa and the 
Millennium Development Goals, and the Johannesburg Summit on Sustainable Development. The 
Johannesburg Summit commemorates ten years of failure to follow through on the previous 
Sustainable Development Summit, which was held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992. Trying to make up 
                                                                 
15 UNDP 
16 rumored to be somewhere in Canada  


 
25
for lost time, the UN in its preparatory documents for Johannesburg recommends 185 actions by 
rich and poor nations. 
 
It is a lot easier for aid agencies to produce observable frameworks rather than actually 
implement risky programs like “empowering the poor” (risky because local elites would resist, as 
they do even in industrial countries). The aid agencies thus do not have to face hard choices 
between a number of competing claims on their scarce implementation resources, potentially 
alienating single issue lobbies that might influence aid revenues. This allows the frameworks to 
include a Christmas tree of aims like “an increased focus on issues like good governance at 
national and international levels and the fight against corruption, respect for all internationally 
recognized human rights, gender issues, capacity and institutional building, social services supply 
and environmental concerns” (UN Conference on the Least Developed Countries 2001) Likewise 
World Bank President James Wolfensohn set out his “Comprehensive Development Framework” 
in 1999 with a checklist of 14 items, each with multiple sub-items: 17 
1. Good and Clean Government 
“capacity building, an open legislative and transparent regulatory system, properly trained and remunerated 
officials … corruption which is the single most corrosive aspect of development” 
2. An Effective Legal and Justice System: 
“the protection of human and property rights… an effective system of property, contract, labor, bankruptcy, 
commercial codes, personal rights laws … that is effectively, impartially and cleanly administered by a 
well-functioning, impartial and honest judicial and legal system.” 
3. A Well-Organized and Supervised Financial System  
“Information and transparency, adequately trained practitioners and supervisors, and internationally 
acceptable accounting and auditing standards ... Regulation and supervision must include banking, savings 
institutions, insurance and pension plans, leasing and investment companies. Capital markets should als o be 
developed and strengthened as resources allow.” 
 4. A Social Safety Net and Social Programs  
“provision must be made for the elderly, the disadvantaged and disabled, for children, for the those men 
and women unable to find work, and those affected by natural disasters and the aftermath of war. In some 
transition economies, the social safety net is needed for those put out of work as a result of large-scale 
privatizations. … special programs for indigenous people … Violence and social unrest” 
5. Education and Knowledge Institutions 
“universal primary education for girls and boys equally, as well as an open and competitive system of 
secondary and tertiary education. ... Adult education, literacy and lifelong learning … education of women 
and girls …learn lessons of practice and history from indigenous peoples and communities… preschool 
education … science, technology, and knowledge transfer.”  
6. Health and Population Issues 
“mothers are supported and that children get adequate health care before and during school years …health 
                                                                 
17 http://www.worldbank.org/cdf/cdf-text.htm 


 
26
services for adults and elderly … services for family health care and family planning. ... growth in 
population … tuberculosis and malaria to AIDS” 
7. Water and Sewerage  
“an effective method of distribution, delivery, finding, and saving … a strategy for sewerage” 
8. Energy 
“the use of wood and fossil fuels, resulting in health and breathing problems. Availability of power is not 
only an issue of convenience but saves the time of women searching for alternative fuels. The 
environmental impact is also great, it having been evident for centuries with forest destruction altering 
weather patterns and affecting the quality of air we breath.” 
9. Roads, Transportation and Telecommunications 
Rural and urban roads …. Trunk roads … to link rural, urban and regional areas. Rail and air transportation 
systems … telecommunications … telephone or e-mail, computers or wind-up radios without batteries” 
10. Sustainable Development, Environmental and Cultural Issues 
“protection of our planetary environment … biodiversity… the quality of our air and water.. degradation of 
important natural resources, like forestry, aquifers …Cultural preservation is also crucial not only historic 
sites, artifacts and books, but also the spoken word and the arts” 
11. Rural Strategy  
“ new crops and agricultural extension programs … {programs} for trading, for microcredit, for storage, for 
transportation, and for non-monopolistic outlets. … technical assistance to farmers and converters of 
agricultural produce. Governments need to think of integrated solutions to rural development.” 
12. Urban Strategy  
“With 66 megacities of more than ten million people expected to be established in developing countries by 
the year 2025… governments must have an urban strategy” 
13. Private Sector Strategy 
“trade policy, tax policies, competition and regulatory policy, and corporate governance. .. a climate of 
investor confidence — with appropriate laws, transparent regulations, and predictable taxes. … protection 
of property rights or fair and equitable labor practices, governments must give certainty to the investor 
about the "rules of the game". Provision of credit, guarantees, sources of funding for projects …” 
14. Special National Considerations 
“ My purpose in suggesting an extra heading (or more, if necessary) … is to give flexibility for specific 
country considerations.” 
 
The CDF says these are additional items; governments should also worry about macroeconomic 
variables like GDP growth, price stability, sustainable government and external debt, a 
competitive real exchange rate, and adequate level of international reserves. The Comprehensive 
Development Framework calls simultaneously for “having all the basic prerequisites, say over a 
20-year timeframe.”   
Similarly the Millennium Development Goals calls for the simultaneous achievement of 
multiple targets by 2015, without asking if these arbitrary benchmarks are the most effective use 
of scarce resources to help poor people in every country, i.e. whether the cost-benefit ratios of 
attaining the various goals are approximately equal. Economics principles dictate that greater 
effort should go to goals with low costs and high benefits, and less effort to goals where the costs 
are prohibitive relative to the benefits. But the “do everything” approach of the MDGs suggests 


 
27
that the aid bureaucracy is above such tradeoffs. Nor do the agencies spell out whether there are 
enough separate policy instruments to meet all of these separate policy targets simultaneously, or 
whether an overstrapped bureaucracy can manipulate these instruments in just the right 
combination to attain the targets.. Aid bureaucracies produce frameworks and goals to satisfy the 
imperative of visible output, as opposed to rational cost-benefit analysis or target-instrument 
analysis of what is effective assistance to the poor.  Meanwhile, recipient government officials 
and the aid agency’s own frontline workers are gradually driven insane by the proliferating 
conditions and objectives, each of which is Priority #1.18 
 
There are more specific consequences of the emphasis on observable outputs. Aid reports 
for many decades have bewailed the tendency of donors to finance new capital investment 
projects (easily observable at a point in time) and the neglect of operating supplies and 
maintenance after the project is completed (which requires more costly ongoing site by site 
monitoring). Donors consistently refuse to finance maintenance, with the idea that this is the 
responsibility of recipient governments. The result is a recurrent theme of the World Bank’s 
periodic reports on Africa: “Vehicles and equipment frequently lie idle for lack of spare parts, 
repairs, gasoline, or other necessities. Schools lack operating funds for salaries and teaching 
materials, and agricultural research stations have difficulty keeping up field trials. Roads, public 
buildings, and processing facilities suffer from lack of maintenance.” (World Bank 1981) “in 
country after country, highways are falling into disrepair, if not disuse, from … inadequate 
funding of maintenance.” (World Bank 1983) “inadequate funds have been allocated to 
operations and maintenance… there are shortages of schoolbooks, medicines, transport fuel, 
small tools, and spare parts” (World Bank 1984) “road maintenance crews lack fuel and bitumen 
… teachers lack books, chalk …health workers have no medicines to distribute” (World Bank 
1986) “schools are now short of books, clinics lack medicines, and infrastructure maintenance is 
                                                                 
18 Several years ago, I read a World Bank report on Nigeria that listed 300 “main” recommendations at the 
beginning of the document. 


 
28
avoided.” (World Bank 1989) “typically, 50 percent of the rural road network requires 
rehabilitation.” (World Bank 1995) “many countries suffer chronic shortages of current funding, 
especially for operations, maintenance, and nonwage inputs.” (World Bank 2000) As these quotes 
show, donors are very aware of the anti-maintenance bias but are seemingly unable to fix the 
problem. Filmer and Pritchett (1997) estimate that the return on spending on instructional 
materials in education is up to 14 times higher than the return to spending on physical facilities in 
a wide-ranging sample of poor countries, but donors continue to favor more observable buildings 
over less observable textbooks. In another field, Morton 1994 points out how donors were willing 
to finance hugely expensive but observable satellite early-warning systems for drought in Africa, 
allowing the inexpensive but unobservable system based on widely scattered rain gauges to fall 
apart. Aid agencies, themselves an example of top-down bureaucracy, tend to favor highly visible 
top-down bureaucracies to deliver services in poor countries, even though the conditions for 
effective bureaucracies are absent (Pritchett and Woolcock 2002). 
 
Since the outputs that really matter are what is observable to the electorate in rich 
countries, aid agencies often strive to produce side effects for rich countries. Thus, rich country 
donors often restrict aid to purchases from their own country’s exporters (the infamous “tied 
aid”). Aid agencies are attentive to the need to reward political allies of the rich countries with 
aid. Such indicators as the frequency with which a recipient country votes with the donor in the 
UN and whether the recipient is an ex-colony of the donor can explain aid flows (Alesina and 
Dollar 2000, World Bank 1998).  After September 11, 2001 there was anecdotal evidence of new 
aid resources for allies in the war against terrorism, like Pakistan and Turkey. The rich countries 
also contribute to proliferation of conditions by themselves imposing conditions on the 
multilaterals – Kapur 2002 notes that “IDA-13’s recommendations/actions total no less than 53 
(one of which is ‘increasing selectivity’).” Of course, the loading down of aid with all kinds of 
extraneous rich country objectives makes it less likely to benefit the poor. 


 
29
 
The inverse of donors’ desire to produce observable positive outputs is their fear of 
producing observable negative outputs. Donors feel this more than ever in recent years with the 
increased success of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in popularizing particular causes in 
the rich country media. For example, NGOs will blame donors for an aid project that produces 
visible environmental damage or does politically sensitive resettlement. Thus, for example, the 
World Bank got tremendous grief for supporting a Chinese project that would resettle poor Han 
farmers in an area considered to be a Tibetan culture area, eventually causing the Chinese 
government to withdraw the project (Wade 2001). The blame function is not necessarily related 
to actual economic costs of negative outputs, since poorly informed monitors will view all of an 
agency’s activities as tarnished after even a small fiasco in one specific area.  Prendergast 2001 
points out that monitoring by poorly informed outsiders can have the perverse effect of diverting 
resources away from the objective of the organization towards avoiding visible mistakes (in his 
example, crime went up in Los Angeles after the department came under external pressure to curb 
police officers being too obvious about beating up suspects).  
 Something like this seems to have happened in the aid industry. The aid agencies are 
choosing increasingly elaborate control procedures to minimize the risk of visible negative 
outputs.  The unfortunate officer on a World Bank country desk is required to produce or 
commission five separate reports on each client country: a Country Economic Memorandum 
(CEM)/Development Policy Review (DPR), Country Financial Accountability Assessment 
(CFAA), Country Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR), Poverty Assessment (PA), and 
Public Expenditure Review (PER). Four other reports are identified as “important in advancing 
the Bank's corporate priorities”: Country Environmental Analysis, Investment Climate 
Assessment, Country Gender Assessment, and Financial Sector Assessment Program Report. 
Twelve other sector reports are mentioned in management guidelines as part of the “menu” but 
are mercifully optional. 


 
30
Wade’s (2001) insightful study of the World Bank describes the proliferation of NGO 
and US government pressures that has led the World Bank to adopt “safeguard policies” in the 
following areas: environmental assessment, natural habitats, forestry, pest management, 
resettlement, indigenous peoples, dam safety, projects on international waterways, and projects in 
disputed areas. That is, the beleaguered World Bank project manager has to certify that they are 
not doing anything wrong in any of these areas. This grab-bag of issues has no particular claim on 
being the most salient for welfare of the poor, they just happen to be politically visible concerns 
monitored by NGOs and American political lobbies. 
Agencies’ urge for increasingly baroque controls is restrained only by their adverse effect 
on the cost of producing positive output. Bureaucracies will trade off one against the other and 
wind up at higher cost for producing output than they would if they were just equating additional 
economic cost to additional revenue. 
We constantly underestimate difficulties, overpromise results, and avoid any appearance of 
incompatibility and conflict, thus repeatedly creating the conditions of failure out of a desperate 
desire for success. (Daniel Patrick Moynihan, 1969) 
 
Spin control 
 
 
The story of foreign aid bureaucracies suggested they will engage in a mixture of 
obfuscation and advertising. Carefully hedged diplomatic language is an art form in aid agencies: 
A war is a “conflict-related reallocation of resources” (World Bank Ethiopia report, 2001) Rich 
country aid efforts to anarchic warlords like in Liberia are “difficult partnerships”  (OECD 2001) 
Countries with homicidal rulers are also known as “low income countries under stress” (World 
Bank 2002). Countries whose presidents loot the treasury experience “governance issues.” Bad 
performance is “progress {that} has not been as fast and comprehensive as envisioned in the 
PRSP” (World Bank PRSP Sourcebook 2001).  When government officials don’t want what the 
aid agency insists upon, there are “differences in priorities and approaches {that}… need to be 
reconciled.” Soliciting donations is “resource mobilization.” Slums are “inadequate human 
settlements.” Being clueless on the destination of debt relief means “continued progress on the 


 
31
Expenditure Management and Control Program will be needed to maximize the benefits from the 
HIPC Initiative.” 19 Other aid community jargon (like “good investment climate”) simply lacks 
any meaning that economic science can discover. You might as well say “the investment climate 
will be stormy in the morning, gradually clearing by afternoon with scattered expropriations.”20 
Aid documents often wander into content-free zones: “We encourage all international 
organizations to seek to continually improve their operations and interactions” (UN Monterrey 
Consensus 2002). As Tendler 1975 said, the aid professional has “a tremendous fear of his own 
writing.” 
 
Another prominent technique of spin control is to assert that while things may have been 
bad in the past, things have now changed for the better. This technique is particularly prominent 
in Africa, the continent where foreign aid has had its most difficult hours.  Foreign aid became 
increasingly important over the decades while growth deteriorated (Figure 2).   
Figure 2: Aid and growth in Africa (10-year moving averages)
5.00%
7.00%
9.00%
11.00%
13.00%
15.00%
17.00%
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
Aid as percent of GDP
-0.50%
0.00%
0.50%
1.00%
1.50%
2.00%
Growth per capita
aid as percent of GDP
per capita growth 
 
The World Bank did a steady stream of progress reports on Africa over the last two 
decades. They first described the poor state of African policy reform: “domestic policy 
                                                                 
19 Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 
Joint Staff Assessment, Ethiopia 


 
32
inadequacies…trade and exchange rate policies have overprotected industry, held back 
agriculture… “ (World Bank 1981) “unless major changes in African programs and policies are 
introduced, no amount of external assistance can generate rising levels of income” (World Bank 
1984) “Weak public sector management has resulted in loss-making public enterprises, poor 
investment choices, costly and unreliable infrastructure, price distortions (especially overvalued 
exchange rates, administered prices, and subsidized credit)” (World Bank 1989) “most African 
countries still lack policies that are sound … few besides Ghana come close to having adequate 
monetary, fiscal, and exchange rate policies…governments continue to intervene heavily in the 
marketing of export crops… the scarce evidence on public enterprise reform suggests that there 
has been no significant reduction in financial flows to public enterprises or in the volume of 
assets held by government…financial reform lags behind as well…nor is there much evidence 
that public spending within those sectors {health and education} is being reallocated away from 
costly tertiary programs and toward the basic services most likely to reach the poor.” (World 
Bank 1994) “While the former Zaire’s Mobuto Sese Seko was reportedly amassing one of the 
world’s largest personal fortunes (invested, naturally, outside his own country), decades of large-
scale foreign assistance left not a trace of progress… Consider Tanzania, where donors poured a 
colossal $2 billion into building roads over 20 years. Did the road network improve? No. For lack 
of maintenance, roads often deteriorated faster than they could be built… Zambia, for example, 
received 18 adjustment loans between 1966–69 and 1990–93 while its policies got worse” (World 
Bank, Assessing Aid, 1998) “the adjustment decades also saw a substantial deterioration in the 
quality of public institutions, a demoralization of public servants, and a decline in the 
effectiveness of service delivery in many countries.” (World Bank 2000)  Africa in 2002 is still 
suffering from “the cruel effects of the HIV/AIDS pandemic, civil wars, and persistent low 
growth rates” (World Bank African Development Indicators Press Release April 11, 2002). 21 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
20 The President of the World Bank, April 2002. 
21 See the discussion of aid’s failure in Africa in Kanbur 2000 and Van de Walle 2001. 


 
33
 
The international community failed to hold aid agencies responsible for this failure. 
Instead, rich countries were influenced by aid agencies’ perpetual promises of a change for the 
better in Africa: “Policy action and foreign assistance … will surely work together to build a 
continent that shows real gains in both development and income in the near future.” (World Bank 
1981) “There is now evidence that many African governments are more clearly aware of the need 
to take major steps to improve the efficiency of productive sectors of their economies” (World 
Bank 1983) “This optimism can be justified by recent experience in Africa …African leaders 
increasingly recognize the need to revise their development strategies…some countries are 
introducing policy and institutional reforms”(World Bank 1984) “progress is clearly under way. 
Especially in the past two years, more countries have started to act, and the changes they are 
making go deeper than before” (World Bank 1986) “since the mid-1980s Africa has seen 
important changes in policies and in economic performance” (World Bank 1989) “African 
countries have made great strides in improving policies and restoring growth” (World Bank 1994) 
“Since the mid-1990s, there have been signs that better economic management has started to pay 
off” (World Bank 2000) “Africa's leaders … have recognized the need to improve their policies, 
spelled out in the New Partnership for African Development (NEPAD) …{they} have pledged to 
pursue a compact of good governance with their people. “ (World Bank African Development 
Indicators Press Release April 2002). 22 
Such optimism (much of which staff knew was misguided according to interviews later 
conducted by Kapur et al. 1997) facilitated the continuing flow of resources to Africa. 
 
                                                                 
22 The contradiction between “great strides in improving policies” and the continued description of 
bad policies calls to mind the story about the Japanese homefront during World War II. The long-suffering 
Japanese people could get their war news only from their government’s propaganda. Nevertheless they 
could follow the war’s course by tracking the location of the glorious victories of The Emperor’s forces, 
which seemed to be moving ever closer and closer back to Japan.  
 


 
34
Presidents have taken to reorganizations like overweight people take to fad diets -- and with 
about the same results. (James Q. Wilson 1989) 
New and improved 
 
Like laundry detergent, aid is always “new and improved.” One instrument for conveying 
this spin is the “reorganization” of the aid agency. The World Bank, founded in 1946, had its first 
reorganization in 1952. Further reorganizations came in 1972, 1981, 1987, 1991, and 1993 
(Kapur et al 1997). World Bank President James Wolfensohn has carried out further large-scale 
reorganization since he took office in 1995. The US foreign aid effort was reorganized in 1948, 
1951, 1953, 1955, and 1960, before USAID was finally created in 1961. Further changes in 
organization of US aid occurred in 1973, 1979, 1985, 1989, 1992, and 1999 (when USAID was 
moved back into the State Department). President George Bush in 2002 proposed an important 
new reorganization of the US aid effort with his Millennium Challenge Account.23 
A related spin is increased emphasis on a desirable “new” goal. Following the experience 
described above with adjustment lending in Africa, a hallmark of donor policy in the new 
millennium (enshrined in 2002’s so-called “Monterrey Consensus”) has been the new emphasis 
on “selectivity” of foreign aid, because “aid has a big effect on growth and poverty reduction” 
only in countries with good policies (World Bank, Assessing Aid, 1998). The World Bank in a 
recent report on aid effectiveness (World Bank 2002) stated that indeed, “during the 1990s, 
overall aid allocation shifted in favor of countries with good policies.” One’s enthusiasm at the 
sinner’s religious conversion is tempered only by knowledge of many previous conversions. The 
table shows that each of the latest donor fads has been around for some time. 
 
                                                                 
23 http://www.usaid.gov/about/chronology.html 


 
35
Table 1: Plus ça change, plus c’est la même chose 
 
Aid Epoch 
Aid idea 
Stone Age 
Iron Age 
Silicon Age 
Donor 
coordination 
“a cooperative enterprise in which 
all nations work together through 
the United Nations and its 
specialized agencies" (Truman 
1949) 
“Aid coordination... has been 
recognized as increasingly 
important…” (World Bank, 1981) 
"{The donors need} to ensure 
better coordination and stronger 
partnership in ...development 
cooperation." (World Bank, 2001) 
Increasing aid 
volume 
"an increase in the per capita 
national incomes cannot be 
brought about without … a sum of 
money …of about $3 billion a 
year” (UN Expert Group 1951).  
“the current flow of ODA … is 
only half the modest target 
prescribed by the internationally 
accepted United Nations Strategy " 
(World Bank President McNamara, 
1973) 
“If we are serious about...meeting 
multilateral development goals we 
have all signed on to, we must 
double ODA from its current level 
of about $50 billion a year.” 
(World Bank President 
Wolfensohn, 2001) 
Aid works in a 
good policy 
environment 
“objective No. 1: To apply stricter 
standards of selectivity … in aiding
developing countries” (President 
John F. Kennedy 1963) 
“ the relief of poverty depends both
on aid and on the policies of the 
recipient countries”  (Development 
Committee Task Force  1985) 
"IDA should increase its selectivity 
… by directing more assistance to 
borrowers with sound policy 
environments.” (World Bank, 
2001) 
Increase 
poverty 
emphasis 
 "far greater emphasis on policies 
and projects which will begin to 
attack the problems of absolute 
poverty” (McNamara 1973) 
“an even stronger emphasis on 
poverty reduction in IDA’s 
programs” (World Bank 1990) 
 “increasing the focus ... on the 
overarching objective of poverty 
reduction” (World Bank, 2001) 
Country 
ownership 
Development policy is “the 
responsibility of the recipient 
alone” (“Partners in 
Development”, 1969) 
 “novel approaches to community 
involvement in service provision” 
(World Bank 1981).  
"greater national ownership of 
development programs ...”  (World 
Bank 2001) 
Debt relief 
“the debt-servicing problem, 
already severe in the early 1960’s, 
has {become} increasingly 
difficult" (World Bank 1970) 
“more concessional reschedulings 
for the poorest debtor countries.” 
(G-7 Summit, 1990) 
“further national and international 
measures ... including, as 
appropriate, debt cancellation.” 
(Monterrey Consensus, UN, 2002)
Africa 
desperately 
needs reform 
“domestic policy 
inadequacies…trade and exchange 
rate policies have overprotected 
industry, held back agriculture… “ 
(World Bank 1981) 
“most African countries still lack 
... adequate monetary, fiscal, and 
exchange rate policies…nor is 
there much evidence that public 
spending... is being reallocated ... 
toward .. basic services .” (World 
Bank 1994)  
 “{There was} a substantial 
deterioration in the quality of 
public institutions...  a decline in 
the effectiveness of service 
delivery … persistent low growth 
rates” (World Bank 2000, 2002) 
Africa is 
already 
reforming 
“many African governments are 
more clearly aware of the need to 
take major steps to improve the 
efficiency...of their economies” 
(World Bank 1983) 
“African countries have made great 
strides in improving policies and 
restoring growth” (World Bank 
1994)  
“Africa's leaders … have 
recognized the need to improve 
their policies, spelled out in the 
New Partnership for African 
Development (NEPAD)" (World 
Bank 2002)  
 


 
36
Indeed, every successive aid document over the decades has called for increased 
“selectivity.” So the very latest document to solicit funds for the 13th replenishment of the World 
Bank’s concessional loan facility states “to improve development effectiveness, IDA should 
increase its selectivity … by directing more assistance to borrowers with sound policy 
environments.” (World Bank, 2001)   Thirty eight years earlier we have: “objective No. 1: To 
apply stricter standards of selectivity … in aiding developing countries” (President John F. 
Kennedy 1963) “Above all, it is realized that … that no foreign help will suffice where there is no 
national will to make the fundamental changes which are needed. It has become very clear that 
the impact made by contribution of resources from outside depends on … his overall economic 
and social policy” (Pearson Commission 1969) “This report stresses that the relief of poverty 
depends both on aid and on the policies of the recipient countries” (Cassen Development 
Committee Task Force on Foreign Aid, 1985) “Donors…agreed to place greater emphasis on 
economic performance.” (Fleming and Smith 1987, IDA-8) “The Deputies underlined the 
importance of sound macroeconomic and sectoral policies as a basis for effective use of IDA 
funds in all recipient countries.” (Stern 1990, IDA-9) “"Even very well designed projects cannot 
succeed in a poor policy…environment." (Wapenhans Report 1992, quoted in Meltzer 
Commission Report).  
Well after the new emphasis on selectivity, in the summer of 2000, the World Bank and 
IMF announced new adjustment loans to President Daniel Arap Moi’s government in Kenya, 
despite 22 years of economic mismanagement during 19 previous adjustment loans to this same 
government. In a couple of weeks in the fall of 1999, donors made Cameroon among the first 
eligible for debt relief, and Transparency International declared Cameroon the most corrupt 
country in the world for the second year in a row (Van de Walle 2001). Indeed, since Van de 
Walle wrote, Cameroon reached the “decision point” on HIPC debt relief in October 2000 
(meaning the World Bank and IMF thought it had a three year track record of good performance). 
Despite IFI enthusiasm, in 2001 Cameroon was still rated among the most corrupt countries in the 


 
37
world by TI and was classified as one of the most undemocratic countries in the world (“not 
free”) by Freedom House. This unsavory combination would qualify the current government of 
Cameroon for the appellation of “odious” according to Birdsall, Williamson, and Deese 2002 
(such an appellation implying no donor funds should go to it). To give a third example, the Bank 
made a second tranche disbursement of a financial sector adjustment loan to Peru in September 
2000,  despite well-documented reports of widespread corruption and the failure to keep the IMF 
agreement in place at the time.  
 More systematically, there is no relationship between the developing countries’ score on 
quality of governance (democracy, service delivery, regulation, corruption, etc.) in 2001 and 
those who received World Bank adjustment loans in fiscal year 2001.  Moreover, I am unable to 
reproduce the World Bank report’s finding of greater selectivity in the 1990s, using the World 
Bank’s own numbers. There is no evidence of a significant positive association between good 
policies (using the World Bank’s own subjective rating, which was what was used to make the 
claims in the 2002 aid effectiveness study) and aid flows in the 1990s or at any other time: 


 
38
 
Correlations of foreign aid (ODA) with World Bank country 
policy and institutional assessments (CPIAs) 
Correlation of 
variable with 
CPIAs: 
ODA/ 
GDP
 
Log of 
ODA  per 
capita
 
obser- 
vations 
1977 
0.172
 
0.131
 
35
1978 
0.167
 
0.086
 
37
1979 
0.104
 
0.124
 
37
1980 
0.006
 
0.111
 
41
1981 
-0.162
 
-0.011
 
42
1982 
-0.349
** 
-0.247
* 
42
1983 
-0.420
***
-0.357
** 
42
1984 
-0.241
 
-0.269
* 
43
1985 
-0.159
 
-0.182
 
47
1986 
-0.060
 
-0.234
 
48
1987 
-0.110
 
-0.141
 
48
1988 
0.010
 
-0.076
 
49
1989 
-0.002
 
-0.032
 
50
1990 
-0.024
 
0.012
 
50
1991 
0.026
 
0.024
 
49
1992 
0.153
 
0.091
 
49
1993 
0.173
 
0.113
 
51
1994 
-0.084
 
0.091
 
51
1995 
-0.040
 
0.081
 
55
1996 
0.049
 
0.123
 
57
1997 
0.063
 
0.141
 
57
1998 
-0.028
 
0.072
 
57
1999 
-0.079
 
0.136
 
50
***Significant at 1% level 
 
 
 
**Significant at 5% level 
 
 
 
 
*Significant at 10% level 
 
 
 
 
Correlation performed on sample of low income countries 
  
World Bank (2002) makes strong claims for selectivity of the of the World Bank’s own 
foreign aid (IDA loans). These loans show somewhat more association with policy ratings (again 
the same CPIA ratings that the World Bank report uses) than does overall ODA, but this 
association is not robust across years or across definitions of the IDA flow (as percent of the 
receiving countries GDP or as amount per capita):24 
                                                                 
24 On the failure of the World Bank and other donors to enforce “selectivity” and “conditionality”, see 
Kanbur 2000, Van de Walle 2001, Kapur et al 1997 and Lancaster 1999. 


 
39
Correlations of IDA lending with World Bank country policy and 
institutional assessments 
Correlation 
of variable 
with CPIAs: 
IDA net 
disbursements/ 
GDP 
 
Log of IDA net 
disbursements 
per capita
 
obser- 
vations 
1980
-0.028 
 
0.086
 
54
1981
-0.143 
 
-0.080
 
53
1982
-0.217 
 
-0.359
***
53
1983
-0.070 
 
-0.112
 
50
1984
0.147 
 
0.037
 
50
1985
-0.024 
 
-0.046
 
55
1986
0.153 
 
-0.151
 
59
1987
0.027 
 
-0.025
 
59
1988
0.103 
 
0.207
 
57
1989
0.103 
 
0.214
 
54
1990
0.079 
 
0.119
 
54
1991
0.116 
 
0.354
***
57
1992
0.166 
 
0.304
** 
59
1993
0.089 
 
0.154
 
61
1994
0.063 
 
0.345
***
67
1995
-0.054 
 
0.138
 
66
1996
-0.023 
 
0.141
 
68
1997
0.119 
 
0.208
* 
71
1998
-0.031 
 
0.043
 
70
1999
0.185 
 
0.253
** 
71
***Significant at 1% level 
 
 
 
 
**Significant at 5% level 
 
 
 
 
*Significant at 10% level 
 
 
 
 
Correlation performed on sample of positive IDA net disbursements 
 
Of course, the “improved” behavior could have happened more recently than is captured 
by the available data. The aid agencies’ always presenting themselves as “new and improved” 
makes spin control easier, in that it is impossible to test how “improved” they are at any given 
moment. One can do research on the past but not on the present. 
{The program} failed… to wage an effective war on poverty. Many battles were fought, but few 
were against poverty. (Congressman James Hanley,1967, quoted in Moynihan 1969) 
 
Why it takes $3521 in aid to get $3.65 to a poor person 
The “new” emphasis on poverty is also continually reinvented. The creation of the 
International Development Association (IDA) for the poorest countries in 1960 reflected an early 


 
40
concern with poverty.  World Bank President McNamara came along in 1973 to “to place far 
greater emphasis on policies and projects which will begin to attack the problems of absolute 
poverty” (McNamara 1973, IDA-4). Despite his best efforts, each new round of replenishment of 
the IDA called for more: “…a growing proportion of lending is directed to combating poverty.” 
(1980, IDA-6) “…The Deputies encouraged an even stronger emphasis on poverty reduction in 
IDA’s programs” (Stern 1990, IDA-9) “the poverty focus of CASs {Country Assistance 
Strategies} should be enhanced.” (IDA-12, 1998) “increasing the focus of IDA and IMF 
concessional assistance on the overarching objective of poverty reduction” (IDA-13, 2001) 
The World Bank’s latest aid report (World Bank 2002) combining the new poverty focus 
and the newly selective aid claims that “an extra $1 billion in ODA would lift more than 284,000 
people out of poverty.” This claim has been prominently featured in the press coverage of the 
report and has been repeated in other aid agencies reports on “aid effectiveness” (for example, 
Her Majesty’s Treasury 2002). Parsing out the logic of this statement makes clear that such 
claims are more about spin than substance.  The additional aid spending per person lifted out of 
poverty is $3521. Poverty is defined as less than $365 a year. According to the way the statement 
says the aid would be distributed, it would increase aid receipts in recipient countries by at best 
no more than 2 percent of GDP (in most cases, much less). The World Bank’s Assessing Aid 
report says that 2 percent of GDP in aid raises growth by 1 percent in good policy countries 
(again an overestimate in this case because the World Bank’s old and new aid reports say not all 
aid is going to good policy countries). The World Bank’s Globalization policy research report 
says that 1 percent of overall GDP per capita growth raises the growth of the poor’s income by an 
equivalent 1 percent. So following the logic of the various World Bank public statements, the 
effect of the $3521 in additional aid per person lifted out of poverty is at best to raise the poor’s 
annual income by $3.65.  Spending $3521 per poor person to increase their income by $3.65 does 
not seem like the world’s biggest bargain. Apparently, the World Bank report authors did not 


 
41
follow through the logic of their various claims to this absurd conclusion. 25 Obviously, aid has 
other objectives than helping a destitute person stagger across the $365 finish line out of the 
poverty headcount.  The emphasis on public relations numbers weaves tangled webs for the aid 
agencies. 
 
Still it is convenient to spin the activities of aid agencies so they are seen to contribute to 
some socially beneficial goal. Aid agencies can mobilize the current enthusiasm for debt relief to 
highlight their “new” benevolence towards heavily indebted poor countries (HIPCs): “Deputies 
reiterated their strong support for the HIPC Debt Relief Initiative and the enhanced framework 
which is providing broader, deeper and faster debt relief to the world's poorest and most indebted 
countries.” (World Bank, IDA-13 replenishment, 2001) This is a much better spin than admitting 
that previous aid loans are uncollectible because of poor results, even in such success stories as 
Ghana and Uganda (nevertheless the World Bank 2002, with impressive chutzpah, gives IDA’s 
recollection rate on loans as evidence for aid effectiveness).  
There is also little mention that 
debt relief has been needed on many previous occasions. In the 60s and 70s, “the debt-servicing 
problem, already severe in the early 1960’s, has made it increasingly difficult for such countries 
to prudently finance their development with loans on conventional or near-conventional terms. To 
raise or even maintain their rate of economic growth, these poorer countries must obtain an 
increasing proportion of the external financial assistance they need on concessionary terms.” 
(International Development Association 1970) Debt problems for poor countries and creeping 
debt relief continued throughout the70s, 80s and 90s (Easterly 2001).  
The 1996 HIPC debt relief initiative was to provide “exit, once and for all, from the 
rescheduling process” and to enable the countries to resume “normal relations with the 
international financial community, characterized by spontaneous financial flows and the full 
                                                                 
25 While these reports had some differences in authorship, all of them were supervised by the same 
managers. 


 
42
honoring of commitments.” 26 Only three years after this “once and for all exit” the IMF and 
World Bank found it necessary to introduce “Enhanced” HIPC Debt Relief, providing yet further 
relief. As of this writing in April 2002, the IMF and World Bank have a new report saying that 8 
to 10 countries (including such success stories as Bolivia and Uganda) will need additional debt 
relief even after graduating from “Enhanced” HIPC.27 Calling debt relief “new” at each moment 
avoids embarrassing questions on what happened to make previous assistance in need of yet 
further debt relief.  
The socially concerned intellectuals…seemed repeatedly to assume that those who had power 
would let it be taken away a lot easier than could be possibly be the case if what was involved 
was power. (Daniel Patrick Moynihan 1969) 
Power to the poor 
 
 A similar story applies to another “new direction” in foreign aid policy, which is home-
grown development, known as “country ownership”, “partnership,” “beneficiary participation”, 
“community-driven development (CDD),” “empowering the poor,” “consultation of 
stakeholders,” and “bottom up development.” The process of the country preparing a Poverty 
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) is described as a means to this goal by the World Bank and 
IMF in 2001: “the PRSP … was a crucial step towards greater national ownership of development 
programs which is essential for increased effectiveness of external assistance.” (World Bank 
2001, IDA-13) “The broadest and most fundamental changes to the work of the IMF arise from 
the fact that the targets and policies embodied in {IMF}-supported programs will emerge directly 
from the country's own poverty reduction strategy.”(IMF 2001) Actually, every foreign aid 
program since Truman has stressed poor countries’ developing “through their own efforts” 
(Truman 1949), emphasizing “self-help” (Kennedy 1961), that development policy is “the 
responsibility of the recipient alone” (“Partners in Development” report—whose title speaks for 
                                                                 
26 P. 126, 129 Boote et al. 1997. 
27 Nor is the story over even then, as independent analysts like Birdsall, Williamson, and Deese 
2002 point out that there remain heavily indebted poor countries outside the program like 
Indonesia, Nigeria, and Pakistan. Birdsall et al. also project that more of the existing HIPC 
countries will need relief beyond the 8-10 cited in the new IMF/World Bank report. 


 
43
itself, 1969), and that agencies should choose “novel approaches to community involvement in 
service provision” (World Bank 1981). Indeed, the rhetoric of involvement of the recipient is 
familiar at least since the 1960s War on Poverty in the United States, which called for the 
“maximum feasible participation” of the communities being helped (immortally satirized by 
Moynihan 1969 as “maximum feasible misunderstanding.”) 
A report from thirteen years ago “sets out a range of proposals aimed at empowering 
ordinary people, and especially women, to greater responsibility for improving their lives—
measures that foster grassroots organization, that … promote nongovernmental and intermediary 
organizations. The growing conviction is that development must be more bottom-up less top-
down” (World Bank Africa report, 1989). A report eight years ago asked “how can the 
effectiveness of aid be increased? …provision of technical assistance designed to so as to 
enhance, rather than undermine, local capacity …increased systematic client consultation, and 
incorporation of the beneficiary viewpoint into program design and implementation.” (World 
Bank 1995) 28  
Despite all this rhetoric, we saw earlier that donors often violate national sovereignty 
with their own rapidly proliferating agendas.29 Moreover, pressures to “move the money” often 
caused donors to substitute their own institutions for those of the recipient country, despite good 
intentions on fostering self-reliance. There are some signs that the same is happening with the 
“new” PRSP process. Since the international financial institutions (IFIs) decided the preparation 
of a PRSP was necessary to receive debt relief under the HIPC program, pressure on the country 
to rapidly produce a PRSP was intense – leaving little time for “consultation with civil society” 
(actually in the event, IFIs agreed to accept an “interim PRSP”).  Surveys of the “civil society” 
that the government was supposed to consult turned up reports of PRSPs being prepared in 
                                                                 
28 See Kanbur and Sandler 1999 on the sorry record of “country ownership” 
29 To put this in perspective, think of whether the United States would have been willing to have 
international agencies or foreign governments dictate its policies or institutions at any point in American 


 
44
English in non-English-speaking countries, and even “in some cases, the rush was such that the 
IFIs simply took over the task of writing the PRSPs  in a way that it would meet the approval of 
the Boards in Washington.” (Jubilee South 2001). In Honduras, the government presented its 
PRSP draft to the IFIs before showing it to its own national legislature. (Catholic Relief Services 
2001) In Bolivia, the first draft of the PRSP was written in part by an American consultant in 
Paris.30  Subsequent redrafting was done by a small team of Bolivian officials who bypassed the 
government’s own pre-existing National Dialogue on poverty relief. In Cambodia, the PRSP 
paper is being prepared by 10 foreign consultants with guidance from the World Bank; the 
government has little involvement.31 In Tanzania, the government had already devised a National 
Poverty Eradication Strategy in consultation with Parliament, but the IFIs insisted upon a new 
process for the PRSP. Because of “the urgency with which they wanted to secure HIPC relief; the 
Tanzanians initially acquiesced in the World Bank writing the I-PRSP for them.” (Grusky et al. 
2001) Even in the cases where governments did prepare the PRSP themselves, the Ministry of 
Finance took the lead with little participation by line ministries or local governments – possibly 
motivated by simply fulfilling a requirement to get donor funds (World Bank Social Development 
Department 2002). Moreover, other aid organizations like the Asian Development Bank and the 
largest bilateral aid agencies (US and Japan) have not adopted the PRSP, despite it being a 
“crucial step” for “increased effectiveness of foreign assistance.” 
Some of the sources cited have their own biases against the IFIs and it is impossible to 
say how much such anecdotes are representative of the new PRSP process. There have also been 
some positive reports of increased participation by civic organizations in determining government 
policy and donor programs.  
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
history. The most famous case of “foreign aid” to the US happened early in American history with French 
military support to the American revolution – but remember George Washington was in command. 
30 Personal communication between the author and that consultant. 
31 WIDER 2001 and private correspondence with donor official on Cambodia. 


 
45
However, even if civil society prepared the document with participation by everyone and 
their cousin, how a bureaucratic document can redistribute power from those who have it to those 
who do not is left unexplained. They might as well say “may the force be with you.” For 
example, the World Bank and IMF awarded a second round of debt relief to Burkina Faso in 
April 2002 based upon the satisfactory completion of a participatory PRSP.32 It would be 
interesting to know more about how much the poor were newly empowered in a one-party state 
that has been in power since 1987, which was in the worst fifth of the world in corruption in 
2001, and which supported rebel warlords that perpetrated tragic atrocities in Sierra Leone, 
Liberia, and Angola.  
Similarly, the poor in Tajikstan must have wondered about how President Emomali 
Rakhmonov managed to satisfy the World Bank and IMF that he had completed an Interim PRSP 
in the fall of 2000 that laid the groundwork for a “participatory” PRSP. President Rakhmonov, in 
power since 1992, has presided over an authoritarian government whose rule has featured years 
of civil war, ethnic conflict and favoritism, political repression, continuing violence, extrajudicial 
killings, disappearances, torture, arbitrary arrests by the security forces, and trafficking in women 
and children. 33 The World Bank and IMF praised Tajikstan’s government in 2002 for a “more 
open dialogue” (IDA and IMF 2002). 
In Bureaucracy World, there is no politics. Participation is an apolitical technical process 
of consulting the poor. The IFIs assume away the political combat between polarized classes, 
regions, or ethnic groups that is the stuff of everyday life in both rich and poor nations. The IFIs 
assume that political strongmen like President Rakhmonov will cheerfully give some of their 
power away to the poor, doing what the poor want instead of what President Rakhmonov wants, 
all through the magic of writing a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper.   
                                                                 
32 
http://lnweb18.worldbank.org/news/pressrelease.nsf/673fa 6c5a2d50a67852565e200692a79/6b834179b3fd
616b85256b990077a8a7?OpenDocument 


 
46
The participation chapter of the World Bank’s PRSP Sourcebook provides a useful 
benchmark. Nowhere does it mention the possibility that the poor might have different interests 
than the political elite, nor that different groups among the poor might have conflicting interests. 
The chapter presents the poor “stakeholders” as an abstraction, much like Marxists used to cite 
“the masses” as the justification for their revolutionary activities.  When the chapter mentions 
diversity among the poor at all, it is merely a complicating factor in gathering information on the 
poor’s circumstances and in the dissemination of the “consensus” somehow achieved. For 
example, the chapter cites the example of Uganda, whose autocratic government helpfully 
translated its Poverty Eradication Action Plan into 5 languages.    The chapter does not mention 
the possibility that, as Ferguson’s (1994) brilliant case study of an aid project in Lesotho shows, 
organs for “participation” can often be captured by an authoritarian state. The participation 
mantra does not address what to do when society and politics are badly polarized along regional 
or ethnic lines, where it is very difficult for foreign aid to maintain neutrality. For example, 
Herring’s (2001) study of the Mahaweli irrigation project in Sri Lanka shows that aid in this case 
exacerbated the Tamil-Sinhalese tensions that fueled the ongoing civil war. 
Aid success stories 
When the aid agencies do report on the past, they report on whoever was successful and 
claim some credit for the success.  For example, the World Bank (2002) offers six aid success 
stories: China, India, Mozambique, Poland, Uganda, and Vietnam.  This is a somewhat surprising 
list, since China and India receive little aid relative to their GDP (0.4 % and 0.7% of GDP 
respectively in the 80s and 90s, which is the period the World Bank study mentions). Poland and 
Vietnam are also below average recipients of foreign aid, even if we ignore the periods before 
recent reforms when they got no aid. And there is a little irony in highlighting two of the world’s 
few remaining Communist party dictatorships (China and Vietnam) as a triumph of aid from 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
33 Freedom House rated Tajikstan as “not free” from 1992 to 2000. The US State Department Human 
Rights Report 2001 mentions the human rights violations cited here. 


 
47
Western capitalists!34 Of course, the reason for selecting these countries is not such a mystery: 
China, India, Mozambique, Uganda, and Vietnam are the fastest growing low income countries in 
the 1990s (which is the period the World Bank focuses on for all but China and India), except for 
#3 Sudan that the World Bank apparently didn’t want to celebrate. Poland is the fastest growing 
transition country. It’s not convenient to point out that as many aid-receiving low income 
countries had negative per capita growth as positive, or that most aid-receiving transition 
countries were a disaster in the 1990s. Among all low income countries, there is not a clear 
relationship between aid and growth (Figure 3). 
Figure 3: Aid and growth in low income 
countries in the 1990s
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Aid as a ratio to GDP
Per capita growth
 
Longer term success stories are not that easy to come by. The aid agencies had often 
mentioned Ghana as an African success story since reforms started in 1983, but recent struggles 
have apparently dropped it from the list.  World Bank 2002 mentions South Korea and Botswana 
as long term success stories (again apparently selected by virtue of their near world-record growth 
rates over the past four decades). Although many other African countries received more, 
                                                                 
34 Milanovic points this out. 


 
48
Botswana did receive significant amounts of aid during its period of rapid growth. Unfortunately, 
a study for the World Bank’s Operations Evaluation Department found that Korea’s growth 
accelerated only after the decline in US aid, and did so following policies contrary to the advice 
of US aid officials; hence, the consensus of most studies of Korea is that aid contributed little to 
Korea’s takeoff (Fox 2000).  
Spin control can also gloss over the contradictions in the different efforts of the aid 
agencies. So the contradiction between “country ownership” and greater “selectivity” (as the IFIs  
decide which “country-owned” policies to select) goes unremarked. The contradiction between 
“participation” and the imposition of the PRSP process by the IFIs (who determine when the 
recipient has “participated” enough to satisfy them) goes unremarked. The tradeoffs between 
targets set out in the Comprehensive Development Framework and the Millennium Development 
Goals – say between faster poverty reduction and greater environmental protection -- also escape 
mention. The answer is “do everything.” In aid agencies, there are no second priorities and there 
are no conflicts between competing goals, much to the chagrin of the unfortunate frontline 
workers who have to implement “everything.” 
You can’t learn how to do it from a slogan that tells you the way to get you want is to 
already have it. (Pressman and Wildavsky 1984) 
The New Amnesia 
 
The examples above of a “new” initiative that repeats many previous initiatives reflects 
the lack of historical memory in the aid community. As described above, the aid community does 
not want to critically examine the past because doing so might lead to negative publicity of past 
failures, threatening the ability to raise new aid revenue. Ironically, the unwillingness to shine 
light on past failures makes new failures more likely. The reluctance to report on the past short-
circuits the process of cumulative learning by doing that is essential to the success of any activity.  
As Isaac Newton said, “if I have been able to see so far, it is because I have stood on the 
shoulders of giants.”  The aid bureaucracy does not want to stand on their predecessors’ shoulders 
and so does not see far. The eminent authors of a well-received two-volume history of the World 


 
49
Bank in 1997 (commissioned by the World Bank at considerable expense for its 50th anniversary, 
Kapur et al 1997) were never invited to give a lecture on their findings within the World Bank. 
 
A comparison with the academic community is apt. Academic papers are only published 
if they generate new findings. Papers subject to this competitive process cite previous studies and 
make clear their incremental contribution. In contrast, studies produced in the cartel of good 
intentions often duplicate one another and repeat the themes of previous studies without citation 
(sometimes because they are unaware of the previous studies). Klitgaard 1990 gives the example 
of a World Bank agriculturalist recommending a cut in cocoa taxes, despite not having had the 
time to read four previous World Bank reports on cocoa production in Equatorial Guinea. A 
USAID consultant recently gave me the example of a large mission that had produced a report on 
corruption in Uganda in 2001, unaware that a British team had produced a report on the same 
topic six months earlier. World Bank reports often repeat the same recommendation for many 
years, without analyzing what had gone wrong with previous recommendations. For example, an 
independent consultant had pointed out financial problems in Kenya Railways as long ago as 
1972. World Bank reports repeated the recommendation to restructure or privatize Kenya 
Railways numerous times, such as in 1983, 1989, 1995, 1996, and 2000, each time failing to point 
out the previous history of failed recommendations. Similarly, World Bank reports on Kenya 
repeated a recommendation for increased funding for road maintenance in 1979, 1983, 1989, 
1994, 1996, and 2000. The World Bank 1998 noted that in Kenya “the World Bank provided aid 
to support identical agricultural policy reforms five separate times.” The sheer repetition of 
adjustment loans to countries with poor track records, like Kenya’s 21 World Bank and IMF 
adjustment loans as of the year 2000, reflects the same historical amnesia. 
 
There is little effort in aid agencies to collect case studies of adjustment programs, 
projects, and sectoral programs, and to use these case studies to inform current management and 
staff what mistakes to avoid and what more successful methods to repeat. For example, the 
chapter on macroeconomic adjustment in the World Bank’s PRSP Sourcebook does not mention 


 
50
the conclusions of many observers that structural adjustment lending was a failure.35 Similarly, 
the chapter on rural poverty does not mention the record of general failure of integrated rural 
development projects, or even the lessons of their occasional successes (as set out in for example 
in Tendler 1993). The World Bank had an expensive program of sending managers for six-week 
intensive training at the Harvard Business School. They would have done better just to send the 
managers to the World Bank’s own library and document archives, where they could read case 
studies of projects failing and (sometimes) succeeding.   
They might have benefited from reading a case study like Ferguson 1994, which 
describes a CIDA project to help farmers in the mountains of Lesotho to gain access to markets 
and develop modern methods of livestock management and cash crop production. The only 
problem was that the beneficiaries did not consider themselves “farmers” since they mainly 
depended on migration to jobs in South Africa, and they already had access to markets, where 
they had long since learnt that cash crop production was not competitive given the region’s poor 
agricultural conditions. Ferguson 1994 describes how the main long run effect of the project 
seemed to be the creation of a new administrative center and army garrison that strengthened 
government control over what had been an opposition stronghold.   
Similarly, the Bank might have learnt from the failure of its $25.6 million Institutional 
Development II project in Malawi, which ended in June 2001. Despite training 1584 officials and 
providing computers and manuals, an internal review concluded that the project did not improve 
the efficiency or effectiveness of civil servants. It also failed to prevent to prevent such incidents 
as the disappearance of the government’s grain reserve, apparently sold for the benefit of 
government parties unknown, which according to latest reports is threatening some Malawians 
with famine in 2002. Similar insights might be gained from the study of the Bank’s $28 million 
health project in Haiti, which ended in March 2001. An internal review concluded the project 
                                                                 
35 see Kanbur 2000, Van de Walle 2001, Kapur et al 1997 and Lancaster 1999. For a poignant description 
of the structural adjustment fiasco in Zambia, see Ferguson 1999. 


 
51
failed to attain most of its objectives, including control of AIDS and TB. Health conditions did 
not improve in Haiti over the life of the project, perhaps compromised by political instability and 
the lack of interest in the Ministries of Finance and Health in the project. Even in a more 
politically stable states like India and Mexico, a Bank shrimp-farming project that ended in 2000 
failed to improve the well-being of its intended 14,000 very poor Indian beneficiaries, while a 
1994-2000 Bank project on solid waste management in Mexican municipalities failed to make 
any progress on expanding modern sanitary landfills..  
Perhaps the Bank managers could also learn from even more surrealistic projects as the 
$45 million Roads Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project in Sierra Leone, disbursed in the 
middle of brutal civil war during 1998-2001. About 33 percent of the credit went to compensate 
contractors for lost time and destruction of their civil works. The rationality of financing 
infrastructure that is simultaneously being destroyed by rampaging armies is not immediately 
apparent.  
Of course, there are more successful projects in the Bank’s portfolio, like the $70 million 
loan to Ceara state government in the Brazilian Northeast concluded in June 2001, where high 
commitment by the government led to innovative initiatives in land reform, rural electrification, 
and water supply. In fact, most projects in the Bank’s portfolio are rated as “satisfactory” by the 
(somewhat-less-than-independent) Operations Evaluation Department. What is sad is that there 
seems to be little effort to draw lessons from successes and failures to inform future efforts, either 
in the World Bank or in other aid agencies. 
It is far easier for would-be reformers to change the formal structure of an institution than to 
change its practices. Redesigning the lines and boxes in an organizational chart is simpler than 
changing how that organization in fact operates. Changing the rules and regulations is simpler 
than eliciting behavior that conforms to them. (James Scott, 1998, p. 255) 
The funnel 
 
It is a paradox of foreign aid that it demands the most from bureaucracy under the 
conditions in which bureaucracy functions worst. Aid bureaucracy has to operate with little 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 


 
52
effective feedback, as mentioned earlier, and must contend with severe skill shortages in the 
recipient countries. Yet aid bureaucracy tries to manage aid through a hierarchical top-down 
process.36 Even though top managers are overwhelmed, individual agents in aid agencies continue 
to refer back to the same center of power for authorization of their actions.37 The center is 
sometimes within the larger assistance agencies like the World Bank or IMF, where the recipient 
government is weak and other donors are small (as in most African countries).  Sometimes a 
bilateral aid agency will take the lead when it has an especially large program in a country, like 
USAID in Egypt. In large countries with strong governments, like India, the recipient government 
becomes the center. Even where the center of power is de facto in aid agencies, agencies try hard 
to get formal approval from the recipient government of all programs and projects.  
 
Given the multiple goals and procedures described earlier, consistent with the urge to 
produce visible outputs and avoid visible fiascos, the center is the chokepoint for aid. Frontline 
staff in aid agencies can barely keep up with the flood of mandates, political pressures, procedural 
requirements, and authorizations required to keep the aid money flowing. In the recipient 
government, the relative burden on the management is even greater, given the scarcity of skills, 
the extreme political pressures in factionalized societies, and the prevalence of red tape and 
corruption. 38  Aid agencies fluctuate between taking over administration themselves and trying to 
nurture “country ownership,” as discussed above. In any case, the implementation of aid projects 
through the frontline bureaucracy becomes the choke point of the whole process. The mighty 
river of aid must pass through a very small administrative funnel.  
It is not surprising that in a country like Ethiopia one major donor noted  a “slow pace of 
disbursement,” which is due to “capacity constraints” at both the government and donor level. 
                                                                 
36 See the excellent description by Morton 1994. 
37 There is of course a huge literature on the shortcomings of central planning. F.A. Hayek was an early 
critic, although long dismissed as an ideologue. James Scott’s important book (1998) is wonderfully 
insightful about many real-world planning fiascos (interestingly, Scott appears to come from almost the 
opposite ideology of Hayek). 
38 Tendler 1975 has a very good description of this process, which remains timely today. 


 
53
This in turn led this donor to emphasize “capacity building” as the “major cross-cutting theme” of 
its development assistance (European Union 2001). Capacity building has been a theme of donor 
recommendations since forever, although it continues to exert its fascination in the latest reports 
(it is point #5 in the World Bank President’s 2002 seven point Agenda for Action After 
Monterrey). There is a certain irony in donors increasing the pressure on the government’s 
managerial capacity through donor red tape and then turning around and trying to satisfy their 
own demands through “capacity building.”  No amount of “capacity-building” seems likely to 
relieve the severe managerial bottlenecks to the foreign aid process.   
 
It does not really address the problem to call for increased “results-based” evaluation of 
aid agencies. Centralized monitoring and evaluation (M&E) just becomes one more activity 
imposed on the frontline staff, adding to the pressure on the funnel. M&E is central planning with 
output targets. M&E has already been a part of many World Bank projects, without much effect. 
Morton 1994 pointed out that “vast sums of money and unbelievable levels of technical 
complexity have been expended to make Monitoring and Evaluation … into a functional tool… 
World Bank representatives did not quite admit that they had spent $40 million, of money lent to 
the Nigerian government for Monitoring and Evaluation, to very little effect.”39 Moreover, 
bureaucracies can manipulate quantitative indicators of performance to achieve “success” without 
real quality improvements.40 (This is different from evaluation for the sake of learning lessons for 
future practice, like control group methodology for particular interventions.) 
                                                                 
39 A more recent example is the World Bank-supported Social Action Program in the 1990s in Pakistan, 
where numerous “results-based” targets were set for the health, education, and rural water supply sectors. 
Performance was so unsatisfactory that the program had to be redesigned halfway through (SAP II replaced 
SAP I), and then performance of the redesigned program was in turn unsatisfactory.  
40 The World Bank’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Sourcebook (2001) gave the example of the target to 
reduce the backlog of cases waiting to be treated in Britain’s nationalized health service. Administrators put 
pressure on doctors to treat less serious cases first, because those could be treated more rapidly and thus 
bring down the backlog more quickly. Another famous anecdote is the condition that the Australian 
government gave for disbursing aid to parks in aboriginal communities, that the communities keep the 
lavatories clean. The communities easily met the condition by cleaning the lavatories once, and then 
padlocking them. 


 
54
 
Aid agencies do not face incentives to economize on the very scarce administrative 
resources in the recipient governments or even in their own front line staff. They instead have the 
incentive to keep producing the visible frameworks and strategies and procedures (all above the 
funnel).  The river of aid keeps flowing, but effective benefits dribble slowly out of the bottom of 
the funnel.  
Is it too strong to suggest that the way to show true respect for … the people of developing countries as a 
whole is not to involve them in some condescending and patronizing “partnership” but merely to leave 
them alone, in the confidence that they do have the necessary strengths and abilities to make their own 
choices? Would the more appropriate outsider role not be to spread the wares of outsider knowledge and 
allow rural people to choose for themselves what they think would be useful? (Morton 1994) 
 
Brainstorming about markets instead of bureaucracy 
 
Given all the perverse incentives faced by bureaucracy in delivering foreign aid, is there a 
better way?  It is time for some brainstorming about market mechanisms for foreign aid. Consider 
how a goods market succeeds in matching those who need something with those who want to 
supply it. There is no center coordinating such matches, there is no monopoly power of suppliers 
to restrict supply and to raise the price, there is no administrative funnel through which all 
matches must pass, there is no pressure for the supplier to produce visible results, there is no 
pretense about simultaneously satisfying contradictory goals, there is no obscurity about what the 
demander really wants – no matter how unobservable those wants. The market has no central 
administration or planning; it achieves its results by the decentralized actions of a myriad of 
participants. The market clears by adjusting the price of the goods to match the quantity of goods 
offered with the quantity of goods demanded. The demander of the goods trades off her various 
needs against each other at the relative market price, which reflects the opportunity cost to the 
supplier of producing the good.  
 
Some markets work through intermediaries. Retailers and wholesalers match producers 
of consumer goods with demanders of those goods. Financial markets have banks matching 
suppliers of savings with loan demanders who want to invest those savings, or brokers matching 


 
55
suppliers and demanders of bonds and equities. Insurance companies match those who want to 
hedge against risk with those who want to take risks for a profit. Intermediaries lower search 
costs for suppliers and demanders. The risk that an intermediary will take the money and run is 
controlled by the need for intermediaries to maintain their reputation for repeated transactions and 
by supporting institutions that collect information on the historical behavior of each intermediary 
and punish intermediaries who misbehave.41 
 
How would markets work in foreign aid? We can imagine intermediaries that arrange 
decentralized matches between those who want to help the poor and the poor who want help to 
improve their future. But how would a “price” clear the market? Think of stock certificates, 
which facilitate impersonal matches between investors and firms, with the price reflecting the 
confidence of the investor in the firm. An analogy is an “aid voucher” given to the poorest parts 
of the population in poor countries. The vouchers could be given either to individuals, 
households, or communities, depending on social structure in the recipient society. Part of new or 
existing aid money would back the vouchers with an amount of funds equal to their face value. 
The poor could turn in the vouchers at any national, international, nongovernmental, or even 
private development agency to receive development services. The agency could then turn in the 
vouchers at the central voucher fund, who would give the agency a corresponding increase in its 
budget.  The poor would then choose how much of their vouchers to spend on any given 
development service, and each development agency would decide whether they can supply the 
service at that “price.” The intermediaries would scout out opportunities to assemble blocks of 
vouchers for a given development service, like roads, health clinic, drugs, school, textbooks, 
water supply, sanitation, irrigation, and fixing potholes. The intermediaries would then shop 
around development agencies to find one willing to supply the service in return for the blocks of 
vouchers. The vouchers would have to have some term structure appropriate to the capital and 
recurrent costs of development services.  
                                                                 
41 See the World Bank’s 2002 WDR, Institutions for Markets. 


 
56
The vouchers would inevitably develop a secondary market, where the price of the 
voucher reflects the success of the aid effort in that area.  Alternatively, aid agencies could issue 
their own vouchers that could be redeemed only at that agency. The secondary market price then 
would give information on the effectiveness of that agency.  
The intermediaries could be anyone – from private individuals or firms to NGOs to 
international financial institutions. Intermediaries could also verify that the customers receive the 
development service requested and are satisfied, which is enforced by the desire of all 
participants to maintain their reputation for future transactions.  For communities that are 
fortunate enough to have electric power, phones, and web access, participants could use the 
Internet to facilitate communication and posting of information on projects searching for funding, 
donors searching for projects, and intermediaries’ reputation. (This last is an idea being pioneered 
by a private company in Washington called Development Space.42 Even if some of the recipient 
communities lack even elementary electric power or phone lines to connect to the Internet, some 
of the other players could communicate via the web.) 
 
Aid vouchers would address some of the bureaucratic hindrances in foreign aid. They 
would induce competition between aid agencies, creating incentives for them to cut costs and 
reward production, shift away from observable trophies to meeting the needs of the ultimate 
beneficiaries. Competition, as compared to the cartel of good intentions, would expand the 
quantity and lower the price of aid services. Competitive pressure would induce aid agencies to 
specialize in their various comparative advantages and reduce the proliferation of donors and 
projects in small, poor countries.   
Vouchers would give valuable feedback from the previously voiceless poor on what the 
poor really want and what and who is effective at meeting those wants. The flow of vouchers to 
different aid agencies would indicate their relative efficiency, with even a small amount of such 
                                                                 
42 http://www.developmentspace.com. I do not have any personal financial stake in Development Space, I 
just think it is a promising idea! 


 
57
transactions at the margin sufficient to give feedback on agency performance (or the vouchers 
could be agency-specific and then the price would reflect agency efficiency, as suggested above). 
Likewise, the flow of vouchers through different intermediaries would indicate their relative 
efficiency and probity.    
The decentralized matching of donors and recipients bypasses the centralized 
administrative funnel that chokes the current delivery of aid. The vouchers create competitive 
pressure on government agencies in poor countries to really deliver services or see their budgets 
stagnate.  If aid agencies are really serious about participation by the poor, then they should like a 
mechanism that allows the poor to make choices. Vouchers are a way to make international 
bureaucracies behave more like firms in private markets. 
 
Are vouchers superior to just giving cash grants to poor individuals? Given the incentives 
facing individuals and the closeness to subsistence of the poor, cash grants would likely be used 
for consumption rather than productivity-enhancing investment. Foreign aid is too small to make 
much of a difference in consumption of the world’s poor. A voucher for development services is 
a subsidy to those productivity-enhancing services for the poor, which conceptually would seem 
to improve well-being of the poor more than a cash subsidy for consumption.  
Still the minimum standard with ANY foreign aid program (including all those discussed 
above) should be that it do no worse than simply giving aid money as a financial asset to the poor. 
A control group of the extreme poor could have aid funds deposited in an account that purchases 
OECD treasury bills and pays out the interest as an income supplement to the poor every year. 
We should be open to the possibility that this alternative would out-compete both existing aid 
delivery mechanisms and other fancier schemes for reinventing aid. 
Even with the voucher recipients, one could imagine a savings alternative. To strengthen 
bargaining power of the voucher recipients, for example, the vouchers could be saved for future 
years if individuals are not satisfied with the services being offered. And the hypothesis that 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 


 
58
vouchers are superior to cash grants could be tested by doing both experiments and comparing the 
behavior of the two groups of recipients to each other and to a control group that did not receive 
either. 
 
Of course, one can think of tons of logistical difficulties with implementing such a 
scheme.  It is a largely untried idea, and should be subjected to all the skepticism appropriate to 
untried ideas. It should be tried only experimentally and gradually (and humbly given the history 
of failure of bright ideas in foreign aid), with a lot of learning and modification along the way.  
And another “of course”, there are some services for which a voucher scheme might work, and 
others for which it clearly would not. Vouchers might work for some local environmental issues 
but not for more global ones.  It’s hard to see how vouchers could solve problems of law and 
order, national defense, enforcing property rights, social conflict, or defending human rights.43 
Some societies may have a predatory government or elite that would steal any vouchers given to 
the poor. The voucher proposal does not directly address the international financial institutions 
and aid community’s difficult problem of fomenting social change from bad governments to good 
governments in poor societies. By increasing voice of beneficiaries, market competition, and 
feedback on government performance, vouchers might increase pressure on governments to 
deliver effective services. However, there are difficult questions about how provision of 
development services by international aid agencies, if they turn out to be the winners in the 
competition for vouchers, would increase or lessen the pressure on national governments to work 
better.  
There are also potential problems of judging aid intermediaries on absolute performance 
because there would likely be sorting of the best aid projects into the best aid intermediaries, who 
engage in “cream-skimming”.  Hsieh and Urquiola 2002 point out this problem with the 
                                                                 
43 Pritchett and Woolcock 2002 point out that “demand-driven” approaches cannot solve the problem in 
sectors where the agency’s “customer” is someone who would prefer the agency NOT to provide the 
service (e.g. the criminal, external or domestic aggressor, or human rights violator and enforcement or 
defence agencies). 


 
59
implementation of school vouchers in Chile, where the increased incentives for school 
performance were offset by stratification between students.  The best private schools attracted the 
best students from the public schools, leaving the remaining students in the public schools worse 
off since there are strong peer effects in schooling. Analogously, one would be concerned that 
rewarding aid intermediaries for absolute performance would cause them to select projects that 
from better off areas that have greater likelihood of success, neglecting poorer areas that need the 
help more. One can think of ways to compensate for these perverse effects, perhaps by giving 
more vouchers to poorer areas or by designing the reward scheme for intermediaries so that they 
are judged by net performance rather than absolute performance. 
There are also worries about the multiple objectives that aid agencies face. Competitive 
pressure might lead aid agencies to compete on some dimensions that satisfy the customers, but 
neglect other goals that serve some larger public purpose (Dixit 2000). They might figure out 
ways to game the system to attract vouchers in ways that don’t improve public welfare. 
Also there are difficult information problems in making sure that poor people with low 
human capital have enough knowledge to make good choices.  Well-informed insiders might buy 
up vouchers at a steep discount from poorly informed peasants.  Nevertheless, it is better to 
address information problems directly rather than not have a market at all. Letting poor people 
make their own choices seems like a powerful force to try harnessing for economic development.  
Other market mechanisms can also be envisioned. 44 Direct subsidies to income creation, 
savings, or human capital accumulation would have some of the same advantages of minimizing 
bureaucracy and getting resources directly to the beneficiaries. Each would use money to create 
                                                                 
44 George Soros has recently made a proposal to use a marketplace to allocate aid (Soros 2002), with 
financing coming from a new issue of Special Drawing Rights by the IMF. Soros recommends a jury of 
eminent persons to vet the decentralized submission of project proposals, which would then be presented 
for financing to donors.  The World Bank’s Private Sector Development Strategy (2001) has some 
interesting ideas about contracting out aid initiatives to private providers with performance-based contracts. 
The Meltzer Commission (2000) suggested the World Bank should with grants solicit competitive bids for 
delivering social services, including from NGOs and private companies, with ex-post performance checked 
by independent auditors. Social Funds are a mechanism that has been tried in some countries to bypass 


 
60
incentives for individuals to invest in future income creation. One reason that the returns to such 
investment are low without a subsidy might be collective action failures. For example, human 
capital investment might only pay off only if you have skilled people to work with. Your human 
capital investment payoff depends on everyone else investing in human capital. If everyone starts 
off with low human capital, people remain trapped in poverty because each individual faces low 
return to human capital accumulation. Subsidies to poor communities cause all individuals to 
increase their investment together, theoretically solving a collective action problem, if any. 45  
Low returns to investment by the poor may also stem from poor institutions and poor 
infrastructure. The top down approach to development tries to bureaucratically improve the 
institutions and infrastructure. It may be just as effective to create increased demand for 
infrastructure and institutions by increasing the productive capacity of individuals, who will then 
have more voice to petition for reforms and can demonstrate high payoffs to reforms. Market-
based subsidies may turn vicious circles of low human capital, poor institutions, and poor 
infrastructure into virtuous ones through bottom-up change.  
One could also foment change from the bottom up by giving some vouchers directly to 
municipal or regional governments that establish a track record of good service delivery. There 
are some examples of “good governments in the tropics,” to use the phrase of Tendler’s (1997) 
study of Ceará state, Brazil.   
One can still try on a separate track to make money available to good national 
governments, still using market forces of competition. One could adopt some variant of Kanbur, 
Sandler, and Morrison’s (1999) “common pool” approach, in which donors would put their 
money into a fund that would finance unrestricted block grants to “good governments.” Of 
course, the critical issue is to decide what is a good government. To resolve the problems of poor 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
bureaucratic obstacles, but these do not really use market mechanisms and are typically centralized at the 
national level (see Tendler 2001, Ellerman 2001). 


 
61
selectivity in the past, the managers of the fund (whoever they are) could announce that only the 
best X governments will receive funding. Governments could then of their own free will decide to 
apply to this fund, submitting a proposal documenting their own program and their previous track 
record at fostering economic development and poverty alleviation. This would be a welcome 
change from the micro-management and the insulting instrusiveness of donors in poor country 
affairs. The fund itself does not violate sovereignty anymore than a venture capital fund violates 
the autonomy of a firm soliciting financing by deciding yes or no on the firm’s application. 
Results of the aid fund would be monitored over time and the management of the fund held 
accountable for bad decisions or poor results.46 
Another advantage of a central aid fund is that it breaks the link between aid money and 
the obligatory use of a particular agency’s bureaucracy. Foreign-assistance agencies would devote 
part of their resources to the common pool. The recipient countries could take the funds and work 
with any agency they choose. This scenario would increase the bargaining power of the poor 
recipients, minimize duplication, and foster competition among aid agencies. 
Maybe we can change existing aid bureaucracies to function more like firms accountable 
to consumers and less like unaccountable central planners. Decentralized autonomous units 
within aid agencies could be encouraged to specialize in delivering particular services in 
particular regions, with control group evaluation of all interventions, systematic accumulation of 
data and previous historical and country experience, and intensive interaction with beneficiaries.  
Beneficiaries and their representatives should “know who to call” to get something done. Such 
units could compete with each other and with units from other aid agencies for the “aid contract” 
to supply a particular service in a particular area, with winners determined by previous track 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
45 This is one possible raison d’etre for aid. The aid community has shown surprisingly little interest in 
what exactly is the conceptual rationale for aid to the poor. Showing that the poor are needy is not enough 
unless you have some concept about how aid would meet those needs. 
46 The “Millenium Challenge Account” proposed of President Bush is a step in this direction, although it 
did not foresee unrestricted block grants. Svensson 2002 discusses the virtues of competition among aid 
recipients to receive funds in an “aid tournament.” 


 
62
record and reputation for efficiency and specialized expertise. These units could eventually be 
split off from the parent agency altogether.  Just as dissatisfied consumers can penalize the firm 
by taking away their business, donors, beneficiaries, and their representatives could exit to 
another supplier if the first one proves unsatisfactory.  To give another analogy, a private firm 
chooses a particular input supplier based on the reputation of the supplier for specialized 
knowledge of the business and the previous experience with that supplier. If a firm is unhappy 
with a supplier, it changes to another supplier. To break up the cartel of good intentions, the 
donors and beneficiaries should be free to choose suppliers who deliver satisfaction. 
And what of donor “coordination”? The problem with aid has not been too much 
competition among donors, as conventional wisdom has it, but too little. The decentralized 
market that matches donors and beneficiaries should be the mechanism that coordinates donors. 
The market does not have two different suppliers producing the same output for the same 
customer, unlike the frequent duplication in foreign aid, because once that customer’s demand is 
satisfied there is no incentive for another supplier to satisfy it again. 
Experience with vouchers and other market mechanisms 
 
There has been some experience with market mechanisms to aid the poor, both in rich 
and poor countries. The most famous are school vouchers. These are issued to parents, who can 
turn them in at any school of their choice who is willing to take them. Although intensely 
controversial, the consensus of the literature seems to be that school vouchers have improved 
schooling opportunities and outcomes for the poor. The studies range from those in US cities like 
Milwaukee (Rouse 1998) to those that find improved earnings of poor workers in Colombia 
(Angrist et al. 2000). Hoxby 2001 found positive effects of school choice on school productivity 
in Milwaukee, Michigan, and Arizona, arguing that regular public schools boosted their 
productivity in response to competition. Peterson et al. 2001 found positive effects of school 
voucher programs on test scores of African-Americans in New York, Dayton, and Washington 
D.C. Hanushek and Rivkin 2001 found that competition increased teacher quality in metropolitan 


 
63
areas across Texas. . As mentioned earlier, however, Hsieh and Urquiola 2002 challenge these 
positive findings with a study of Chile that fails to find overall positive nationwide effects of 
vouchers, arguing that negative general equilibrium effects of increased segregation by skill 
offset positive effects on individual students or schools. 
Another voucher experiment in the US was with vouchers for housing for the poor, 
giving the poor choices on where to live, which some studies find improved well-being (Blank 
1997 ).  Contracting out of public services, performance-based reviews, or outright privatization 
in the US, UK, and New Zealand have garnered mixed reviews (see survey in Dixit 2000). 
 
There are alternative market mechanisms to vouchers that have also been tried. There are 
many programs in poor countries to provide cash or food to families in return for keeping their 
kids in school (PROGRESA in Mexico, Bono Escolar in Argentina, Bolsa Escola in Brazil,  the 
SUF or Subsidio Unitario Familiar in Chile, PRAF in Honduras, a subsidy to female students in 
China, and Food for Education in Bangladesh; see Morley and Coady 2002). Studies of the 
Bangladesh and Mexico programs have found a positive effect on schooling and income (Morley 
and Coady 2002, Ravallion and Wodon 1999, Skoufias et al 2000, IFPRI 2000). Subsidies to 
income creation by the poor, such as the Earned Income Tax Credit in the US, seem to have 
increased work effort and income (Blank 1997, Blank and Ellwood 2001, Neumark and Wascher 
2000, Hotz and Scholz 2001)  The welfare state seems to succeed at ameliorating poverty in rich 
societies where there is a strong consensus about helping the poor; racial antagonisms seem to be 
the main reason why the government does not try harder to reduce poverty in the US (Alesina et 
al. 2001). 


 
64
The reasonable man adapts himself to the world. 
The unreasonable one persists in trying to adapt the world to himself. 
Therefore, all progress depends on the unreasonable man. 
George Bernard Shaw (quoted in Power 2002) 
 
Conclusions 
 
Aid foundered in a sea of bureaucracy, despite the good intentions, altruism, and genuine 
professional dedication of the individuals involved. The aid community responded to its difficult 
environment by organizing itself as a cartel of good intentions, suppressing critical feedback and 
learning from the past, suppressing competitive pressure to deliver results, and suppressing 
identification of the best channel of resources for different objectives. The bureaucracy controlled 
foreign aid, with the result that foreign aid lost support in the rich countries and liberal political 
and economic ideals lost support in the poor countries. 
Foreign aid should try harder to harness the decentralized genius of the market in order 
for aid to really reach its intended beneficiaries. Rather than trying to fix a pothole for one poor 
person in Ethiopia through an arsenal of international goals, frameworks, and bureaucracies, let 
aid marketplaces and aid vouchers work to match a donor with that recipient. Rather than 
imposing processes, strategies, and wish-lists on the poor, let the poor make their own choices. If 
aid vouchers and other market mechanisms were more effective at getting donor funds to the 
poor, support in rich countries for foreign aid would likely increase (maybe even double!) 


 
65
Bibliography 
 
Alesina Alberto, Edward Glaeser, Bruce Sacerdote, 2001, “WHY DOESN’T THE US HAVE A 
EUROPEAN-STYLE WELFARE SYSTEM?” NBER Working Paper 8524 
 
Arndt, H.W. Economic Development: The History of an Idea, University of Chicago Press, 1987 
 
Birdsall, Nancy and John Williamson, with Brian Deese. 2002. Delivering on Debt: From IMF 
Gold to a New Aid Architecture, Center for Global Development and Institute for 
International Economics. 
 
Blank, Rebecca. 1997. It takes a nation: a new agenda for fighting poverty. Princeton: Russell 
Sage Foundation. 
 
Blank, Rebecca and David Ellwood, 2001, The Clinton Legacy for America’s Poor. NBER 
Working Paper 8437, August. 
 
Boote, Anthony, Fred Kilby, Kamau Thugge, and Axel Van Trotsenburg. 1997. “Debt Relief for 
Low-Income Countries and the HIPC Debt Initiative,” in Z. Iqbal and R. Kanbur, eds. 
External Finance for Low-Income Countries, International Monetary Fund. 
 
Cassen, Robert. Does Aid Work? Oxford University Press. 1985 
 
Catholic Relief Services REVIEW OF THE POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY PAPER 
INITIATIVE, Based upon the Experiences and Comments of CRS Partners in Bolivia, 
Honduras, Zambia and Cameroon December 2001 
 
Dixit, Avinash. 2000. Incentives and Organizations in the Public Sector: An Interpretive Review. 
Mimeo, Princeton University.  
 
Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh, Tatiana Nenova, and Andrei Shleifer, 2001, Who Owns the 
Media? NBER Working Paper No.w8288, May 2001  
 
Easterly, William. 2001. The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists’ Adventures and 
Misadventures in the Tropics. (Cambridge MA: MIT Press). 
 
Easterly, William. 2002. “What did structural adjustment adjust? The association of policies and 
growth with repeated IMF and World Bank adjustment loans,” mimeo, Center for Global 
Development. 
 
Ellerman, David, Generic Problems with Social Funds, DECVP, World Bank mimeo, October 
2001 
 
European Union. 2001. Ethiopia – European Union Country Strategy Paper and Indicative 
Program 2002-2007, December,  
http://europa.eu.int/comm/development/strat_papers/docs/et_csp.pdf 
 
Ferguson, James. 1994. The Anti-Politics Machine: “Development,” Depoliticization and 
Bureaucratic Power in Lesotho. University of Minnesota Press: Minneapolis. 


 
66
 
Ferguson, James. 1999. Expectations of modernity: myths and meanings of urban life on the 
Zambian copperbelt. University of California Press: Berkeley. 
 
Filmer, Deon and Lant Pritchett, What Education Production Functions Really Show: A Positive 
Theory of Education Expenditures, World Bank Working Paper, 1997. 
 
Filmer, Deon, Jeffrey Hammer, Lant Pritchett, Health Policy in Poor Countries: Weak Links in 
the Chain, World Bank Working Paper, 1997 
 
Fleming, Alexander and Mary Oakes Smith, Raising Resources for IDA: the Eighth 
Replenishment, Finance and Development, September 1987, 23-16 
 
Fox, James. 2000. Applying the Comprehensive Development Framework to USAID 
Experiences, OED Working Paper Series No. 15, World Bank. 
 
Goldwin, Robert A. editor, Why Foreign Aid? Rand McNally Public Affairs Series, 1963 
 
Grusky et al 2000, Globalization Challenge Initiative 
 
Hanushek Eric A. and Steven G. Rivkin. 2001. “Does Public School Competition Affect Teacher 
Quality?” Paper prepared for NBER Economics of School Choice Conference 
Islamorada, Florida February 22-24, 2001, revised May 2001 
 
Her Majesty’s Treasury and Department for International Development, 2002, The Case for Aid 
to the Poorest Countries, United Kingdom. 
 
Hotz, Joseph and John Karl Scholz. 2001. “The Earned Income Tax Credit.” NBER Working 
Paper 8078, January 2001. 
 
Hoxby, Caroline M. 2001. School Choice and School Productivity (or Could School Choice be a 
Tide that Lifts All Boats?) Prepared for NBER Conference on The Economics of School 
Choice, Cheeca Lodge, February 23-24, 2001. 
 
Hsieh Chang-Tai and Miguel Urquiola, When schools compete, how do they compete? An 
assessment of Chile's nationwide school voucher program, Princeton University and 
Cornell University mimeo, 2002. 
 
International Development Association, IDA: 50 Questions and Answers, May 1970. 
 
International Development Association, Sixth Replenishment of IDA Resources, Report of the 
Executive Directors to the Board of Governors dated 15 January 1980. 
 
International Development Association, Additions to IDA Resources: Twelfth Replenishment A 
Partnership for Poverty Reduction, December 23, 1998 
 
International Development Association, Additions to IDA Resources: Thirteenth Replenishment 
Supporting Poverty Reduction Strategies, 2001 
 


 
67
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), (2000), “Is PROGRESA Working:  
Summary of the Results of an Evaluation by IFPRI,” (Washington: IFPRI, mimeo). 
 
International Monetary Fund, Description of the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, 
http://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/facts/prgf.htm 
 
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
ASSOCIATION,  FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA, Interim 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, Joint Staff Assessment, 2001 
 
International Development Association and International Monetary Fund, 2002, “Review of the 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) Approach: Early Experience with 
Interim PRSPs and Full PRSPs,” March 26. 
 
. 
 
Isham, Jonathan, Daniel Kaufmann, and Lant Pritchett, Governance and Returns on Investment: 
An Empirical Investigation, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 1550. 
(November 1995) 
 
Jubilee South, Focus on the Global South, AWEPON, and the Centro de Estudios Internacionales 
with the support of the World Council of Churches, THE WORLD BANK AND THE 
PRSP: FLAWED THINKING AND FAILING EXPERIENCES, 2001 
 
Kanbur, Ravi. Aid, Conditionality and Debt in Africa in Finn Tarp (ed), Foreign Aid and 
Development: Lessons Learnt and Directions for the Future, Routledge, 2000. 
 
Kanbur, Ravi and Todd Sandler, with Kevin Morrison. 1999. The Future of Development 
Assistance: Common Pools and International Public Goods. ODC Working Paper No. 25. 
 
Kapur, Devesh, John P. Lewis, and Richard Webb. The World Bank: Its First Half Century, 
Volume 1: History, Brookings Institution Press, 1997 
 
Kapur, Devesh. 2002. “DO AS I SAY NOT AS I DO: A CRITIQUE OF G-7 PROPOSALS ON 
REFORMING THE MDBs.” Mimeo, Harvard University Department of Government. 
 
Kaufmann, Daniel, Massimo Mastruzzi and Diego Zavaleta 2001.“Sustained Macroeconomic 
Reforms, Tepid Growth: A Governance Puzzle in Bolivia?”, The World Bank 
,September, 2001  
 
Kaufmann, Daniel, Gil Mehrez and Tugrul Gurgur, 2002, “Voice or Public Sector Management?: 
Determinants of Public Sector Performance based on a Survey of Public Officials in 
Bolivia – Theory and Evidence,” World Bank and IMF mimeo. 
 
Klitgaard, Robert. Tropical Gangsters. Basic Books. 1990 
 
Lancaster, Carol. 1999. Aid to Africa: So Much to Do, So Little Done. University of Chicago 
Press: Chicago. 
 


 
68
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silane, Andrei Shleifer, Robert Vishny, 1998, The Quality 
of Government, Journal of Law Economics and Organization, Vol. 15 (April 1998): 
222-279. 
 
McNamara, Robert S. Address to the Board of Governors, Nairobi Kenya, September 24, 1973. 
speech made during 4th replenishment of IDA negotiations. 
 
Meltzer Commission Report, March 2000, http://www.house.gov/jec/imf/meltzer.pdf 
 
Millikan Max F. and W.W. Rostow, A Proposal: Key to an Effective Aid Policy, With the 
collaboration of P.N. Rosenstein-Rodan and others at the Center for International 
Studies, MIT, Harper and Brothers, 1957. 
 
Moe, Terry. “The positive theory of public bureaucracy.” In Dennis Mueller, Perspectives on 
public choice: a handbook. Cambridge University Press 1997, 455-480. 
 
Morley Samuel and David Coady. 2002. “Reducing poverty through subsidized human capital 
accumulation”, mimeo, Center for Global Development, Washington DC 
 
Morton, James. The Poverty of Nations: The Aid Dilemma at the Heart of Africa, I.B. Tauris 
Publishers, London, 1994. 
 
Moynihan, Daniel Patrick. Maximum Feasible Misunderstanding: Community Action in the War 
on Poverty, The Free Press: New York, 1969. 
 
Neumark, David and William Wascher. 2000. “Using the EITC to Help Poor Families: New 
Evidence and a Comparison with the Minimum Wage.” NBER Working Paper No. 7599 
March 2000 
 
Niskanen, William. “Bureaucracy” in William F. Shughart II and Laura Razzolini, The Elgar 
Companion to Public Choice, Edward Elgar: Cheltenham UK, 2001 
 
Niskanen, William (1971) Bureaucracy and representative government. Chicago: Aldine-
Atherton. 
 
Niskanen, William. 1968. “The Peculiar Economics of Bureaucracy.” American Economic 
Review Papers and Proceedings 58: 293-305. 
 
OECD Development Assistance Committee, “Poor Performers: Basic Approaches for Supporting 
Development in Difficult Partnerships,” November 2001. 
 
Pearson, Lester B. Partners in Development: Report of the Commission on International 
Development, New York: Praeger, 1969 
 
Peterson, Paul E. with William G. Howell Patrick J. Wolf and David E. Campbell. 2001. School 
Vouchers: Results from Randomized Experiments, Paper prepared for the Conference on 
School Choice, sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic Research, Florida Keys, 
Florida, February 2001. 
 


 
69
Prendergast, Canice. 2001. SELECTION AND OVERSIGHT IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR, 
WITH THE LOS ANGELES POLICE DEPARTMENT AS AN EXAMPLE. NBER 
Working Paper 8664 
 
Preparatory Committee for the International Conference on Financing for Development 
Resumed Third Session, 15 – 19 October 2001, Statement by Mr. Lennart Båge, 
President of the International Fund for Agricultural Development, Delivered on behalf of 
of the three Rome-based UN Agencies, FAO, IFAD, and WFP, United Nations, New 
York, 17 October 2001 
 
Pressman, Jeffrey and Aaron Wildavsky, 1984, Implementation, 3rd Edition, University of 
California Press: Berkeley. 
 
Pritchett, Lant. “Why it pays to be ignorant,” mimeo Harvard Kennedy School, 2001. 
 
Pritchet,t Lant and  Michael Woolcock, Solutions when the Solution is the Problem:Arraying the 
Disarray in Development (Harvard Universit,y Center for Global Development and 
World Bank mimeo), March 19, 2002 
 
Ravallion, Martín and Quentin Wodon (1999), “Does Child Labor Displace Schooling?  Evidence 
on Behavioral Responses to an Enrollment Subsidy,”  (World Bank working paper 2116). 
 
Rostow, W.W. The Stages of Growth, 1960. 
 
Scott, James C.  1998. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human 
Condition Have Failed. Yale University Press.  
 
Skoufias, Emmanuel, Benjamin Davis and Sergio de la Vega, (2001), “Targeting the Poor in 
Mexico: An Evaluation of the Selection of Households for Progresa,” (Washington-
FCND # 103). 
 
Soros, George. 2002. George Soros on Globalization. New York: Public Affairs 
 
Stern, Ernest. Mobilizing Resources for IDA: The Ninth Replenishment, Finance and 
Development, June 1990, p. 20-23 
 
Svensson, Jakob. 2002"Why Conditional Aid Doesn’t Work and What Can Be Done About It?", 
Journal of Development Economics,  forthcoming. 
 
Tendler, Judith. Inside Foreign Aid, The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1975 
 
Tendler, Judith. 2000, “Why Are Social Funds So Popular?” in Shahid Yusuf and S. Evenett 
(eds)., Local Dynamics in an Era of Globalization, World Bank, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press: 114-29.. 
 
Tendler, Judith. 1997. Good Government in the Tropics. Johns Hopkins. 
 
Tirole, Jean. 1994. “The internal organization of government.” Oxford Economic Papers. 46, 1-
29. 
 
Truman, Harry S. Inaugural Address January 20, 1949 


 
70
 
UN Expert Group, Measures for the Economic Development of Under-developed Countries, 
United Nations, Department of Economic Affairs, New York, May 1951. 
 
UNDP Review of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) New York, December 2001 
 
 
 
Progress Report, 2001 
 
Van de Walle, Nicolas. African Economies and the Politics of Permanent Crisis, 1979-99, 
Cambridge University Press, 2001 
 
Wade. Robert 2001. “The U.S. Role in the Malaise at the World Bank: Get up Gulliver,” G-24. 
September. 
 
Wapenhans Report, “Effective Implementation: Key to Development Impact,” World Bank, 
1992. 
 
Wilson, James Q. 1989. Bureaucracy, Basic Books: New York. 
 
Wintrobe, Ronald. “Modern bureaucratic theory.” In Dennis Mueller, Perspectives on public 
choice: a handbook. Cambridge University Press 1997, 429-454. 
 
Wolfensohn, James D. A PROPOSAL FOR A COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT 
FRAMEWORK, World Bank, January 21, 1999 
 
World Bank, Accelerated Development in Sub-Saharan Africa: An Agenda for Action, 1981 
 
World Bank, Sub-saharan Africa: Progress Report on Development Prospects and Programs, 
1983 
 
World Bank, Toward Sustained Development in Sub-Saharan African: A Joint Program of 
Action, 1984 
 
World Bank, World Development Report, 1985 
 
World Bank, Financing Adjustment with Growth in Sub-Saharan Africa, 1986-90, Washington 
DC 1986. 
 
World Bank, World Development Report, 1987 
 
World Bank, World Development Report, 1988 
 
World Bank, World Development Report, 1989 
 
World Bank, Sub-Saharan Africa: From Crisis to Sustainable Growth – A Long Term 
Perspective Study, 1989 


 
71
 
World Bank, World Development Report, 1990 
 
World Bank, The African Capacity Building Initiative (ACBI), Washington DC, 1991. 
 
World Bank, Adjustment in Africa: Reforms, Results, and the Road Ahead, 1994 
 
World Bank, A Continent in Transition: Sub-Saharan Africa in the Mid-1990s, Africa Region, 
World Bank, Washington DC November 1995. 
 
World Bank, IDA in Action 1993-1996:The Pursuit of Sustained Poverty Reduction,  Washington 
DC, 1997. 
 
World Bank, Assessing Aid: What Works, What Doesn’t, and Why, 1998 
 
World Bank, Can Africa claim the 21st Century? World Bank, 2000 
 
World Bank, Private Sector Development Strategy: Directions for the World Bank Group, 
December 3, 2001. 
 
World Bank. 2001. World Development Report 2002: Building Institutions for Markets. 
 
World Bank. 2001. Ten Things You Never Knew About the World Bank. 
 
World Bank. 2001. Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper Sourcebook 
 
World Bank, 2001. Goals for Development: History, Prospects, and Costs, preliminary draft, 
12/21/01 
 
World Bank 2002. The Role and Effectiveness of Development Assistance: Lessons from World 
Bank Experience, World Bank: Washington DC. 
 
World Bank 2002. African Development Indicators. Press Release April 11, 2002. 
 
World Bank Social Development Department, 2002, Participation in Poverty Reduction Strategy 
Papers: A Retrospective Study, January. 
 
World Development Movement, Policies to Roll-back the State and Privatise? Poverty Reduction 
Strategy Papers investigated, WIDER 2001. 
