The Practicalities of Running Randomized Evaluations: Partnerships, Measurement, Ethics, and 
Transparency 
Economists have known for a long time that randomization could help identify causal connections by 
solving the problem of selection bias. Chapter 1 in this book and Gueron and Rolston (2013) describe the 
effort in the US to move experiments out of the laboratory into the policy world in the 1960s and 1970s. 
This experience was critical in proving the feasibility of field experiments, working through some of the 
important ethical questions involved, showing how researchers and practitioners could work together, 
and demonstrating that the results of field experiments were often very different from those generated 
by observational studies. Interestingly, there was relatively limited academic support for this first wave 
of field experiments (Gueron and Rolston 2013), most of which were carried out by research groups 
such as MDRC, Abt, and Mathematica, to evaluate US government programs, and they primarily used 
individual-level randomization. In contrast, a more recent wave of field experiments starting in the mid-
1990s was driven by academics, initially was focused on developing countries, often worked with 
nongovernmental organizations, and frequently used clustered designs.  
A number of critical innovations spurred the take-off of field experiments, particularly in academic 
circles. Some of these were theoretical: They included understanding how to maximize power from 
limited sample sizes (Imbens 2012; Bruhn and McKenzie 2009); how to use RCTs to measure 
externalities (Miguel and Kremer 2004); the diffusion of information (Duflo and Saez 2002; Kremer and 
Miguel 2007); equilibrium effects (Crepon et al. 2012; Mobarak and Rosenzweig 2014); and parameters 
in network theory (Chandrasekhar, Kinnan, and Larreguy 2015; Beaman et al. 2013).  
Many of the innovations that powered the growth of field experiments, however, were intensely 
practical. Researchers learned how to work with a wide range of implementing organizations including 
local nongovernmental organizations, private companies, and social entrepreneurs. Unlike governments, 
with whom most early RCTs were conducted, these new partners tended to be more open to trying new 
approaches to solving problems and were more willing to test different aspects of their programs 
separately and in combination. Logistical and financial constraints meant they could not reach everyone 
they wanted to, making randomization a natural method for allocating rationed resources. There were 
also important practical innovations in measurement which opened up new subject areas to field 
experiments. With these new partners and new subject areas for experiments came a range of new 
ethical questions, including how to define the boundary between practice and research and how to 
regulate activity across that boundary as researchers got more and more involved in the design and 
implementation of the interventions they tested. Finally, the dramatic rise in the use of experiments 
increased the benefits associated with research transparency.  
This chapter seeks to record some of these practical innovations that have accompanied and enabled 
the expansion in the use of field experiments. It is impossible to be comprehensive, so we focus on four 
discrete and important issues. Section A discusses how to select and work with a partner organization 
that will implement the program to be evaluated by an RCT, as well the conditions under which it makes 
sense for a researcher to be both the implementer and the evaluator of a program. Section B discusses 
practical challenges in data collection and strategies to combat them, including minimizing attrition, 


monitoring enumerators, and ensuring that data are collected consistently in treatment and comparison 
areas. Section C covers the practical ethical issues a researcher conducting randomized evaluations must 
take into account when designing and carrying out their research. Section D covers topics in research 
transparency, including publication bias, data mining, experimental registries, preanalysis plans, data 
publication reanalysis, and replication. 
 
A. Collaboration between researchers and implementers 
Unlike most academic economic research, running field-based randomized control trials (RCTs) often 
involves intense collaboration between researchers and the organization or individuals who are 
implementing the intervention that is being evaluated. This collaboration can be the best thing about 
working on a field experiment, or the worst. If the collaboration goes well, the researcher can learn an 
enormous amount from the implementing partner about how local formal and informal institutions 
work, how to measure outcomes in the local context, and how to interpret the results of the study. If 
the partnership is going badly it is almost impossible to run a high-quality field experiment. In this 
section we discuss practical ways to develop and maintain a good collaboration with an implementing 
partner.  
We start with tips on how to find the right implementer and what to do to make the researcher–
implementer partnership as effective as possible. We then examine whether and when it is worth 
attempting to “self-implement,” i.e., be both implementer and evaluator.  
Developing a good researcher–implementer partnership 
Researcher and implementer partnerships, like any other relationship, require listening to and 
understanding the other partner, being flexible to their needs, respecting the other’s contribution, and 
being honest. During an initial “courtship” phase the two groups seek to understand whether they want 
to enter into an evaluation partnership. What should a researcher be looking for in an implementer 
during this phase? What can a researcher do to make themselves useful to, and thus support a good 
relationship with, an implementing organization? 
What makes a good implementing partner? 
i) 
Sufficient scale 
A first and easy-to-determine filter for a good implementing partner is whether an organization is 
working at a big enough scale to be able to generate a sample size that will provide enough power for 
the experiment. How big is sufficient depends on the level at which the randomization is going to take 
place (see Chapter XX), as well as the number of variants of the program that are going to be compared, 
and the outcome of interest. Thus a lot of detailed discussion needs to take place about what a potential 
evaluation would look like before it is possible to say if an evaluation is feasible. It is surprising how 
many potential partnerships can be ruled out quite early on because the implementer is just not 
working at a big enough scale to make a decent evaluation possible. 


ii) 
Flexibility 
A willingness to try different versions of the program and adapt elements in response to discussions 
with researchers is an important attribute of an implementing partner.  We can learn a lot by testing 
different parts of a program together and separately or by comparing different approaches to the same 
problem against each other, but doing this type of testing requires a very flexible partner. The best 
partnerships are the ones in which researcher and implementer work together to decide the most 
interesting versions of the program to test. 
iii) 
Technical programmatic expertise and a representative program 
There is a risk of testing a program run by an inexperienced implementer, finding a null result, and 
generating the response, “Of course there was no impact, you worked with an inexperienced 
implementer.” The researcher also has less to learn about how good programs are run from an 
inexperienced implementer and the partnership risks becoming one-sided. At the other end of the 
spectrum, we may not want to work with a gold-plated implementer unless we want to test proof-of-
concept. There are two risks here: that the program is so expensive that it will never be cost-effective 
even if it is effective; and that it relies on unusual and difficult-to-reproduce resources. For example, a 
program that relies on a few very dynamic teachers or mentors might be hard to replicate. An 
implementer working at a very big scale is unlikely to run a gold-plated program and has already shown 
the program can be scaled. It is also possible to work with a smaller implementer, but one that closely 
follows a model used by others. The microcredit organization Spandana was a perfect implementation 
partner for our evaluation of the impact of microcredit (Banerjee, Duflo, Glennerster, and Kinnan 2015). 
They operated at a large scale and their credit product was close to that of many other microcredit 
organizations. We tested their impact as they expanded into a large Indian city, a popular type of 
location for microcredit organizations.  
iv) 
Local expertise and reputation 
Implementers that have been working with a population for many years have in-depth knowledge of 
local formal and informal institutions, population characteristics, and geography that is invaluable in 
designing and implementing an evaluation. They can answer questions like, What messages are likely to 
resonate with this population? What does success look like and how can we measure it? When I started 
working in Sierra Leone I spent a long time traveling round the country with staff from Statistics Sierra 
Leone, Care, and the Institutional Reform and Capacity Building Project. One had worked with Paul 
Richards, an important anthropologist in Sierra Leone. Our final measures of trust, group membership, 
and collective action relied heavily on their suggestions and input. I learned that it was socially 
acceptable to ask about the bloody civil war that had just ended but that asking about marital disputes 
could get us thrown out of the village. From Tejan Rogers l learned that every rural (and some urban) 
communities in Sierra Leone come together for “road brushing” where they clear encroaching 
vegetation from the dirt road that links their community to the next and even build the common palm-
log bridges over rivers. How often this activity took place and the proportion of the community that took 
part became our preferred measure of collective action and has been used by many other authors since.  


Just as importantly, an implementer who has been working locally has a reputation in local communities 
that would take a researcher years to build. This reputation can be vital. We learn little about the impact 
of a program if suspicion of the implementer means that few take up the program. The reputation of the 
implementing organization can also be critical to the research team being permitted to operate in the 
community and to getting a high response rate to surveys. 
Researchers need to understand how valuable this reputational capital is to the implementer. What may 
seem like reluctance on the part of the implementing partner to try new ideas may be a fully justified 
caution to put their hard-won reputation on the line. 
v) 
Low staff turnover 
Evaluation is a partnership of trust and understanding and this takes time to build. All too often a key 
counterpart in the implementing organization will move on just as an evaluation is reaching a critical 
stage. Their successor may be less open to evaluation, want to test a different question, be against 
randomization, or just uninterested. High turnover can happen in any organization, but governments 
and organizations with foreign staff are particularly likely to have high turnover. NGOs that draw their 
staff from the local community tend to experience less staff turnover. The only way a researcher can 
protect the evaluation is to try and build relationships at many levels of the implementing organization, 
so that the loss of one champion does not doom the entire project.  
vi) 
Desire to know the truth and willingness to invest in uncovering it 
The most important quality of an implementing partner is the desire to know the true impact of an 
intervention and a willingness to devote time and energy to helping the researcher uncover the truth. 
Many organizations start off enthusiastic about the idea of an evaluation: they want an expert to certify 
that their program is very successful. At some point these organizations realize that it is possible that a 
rigorous evaluation may conclude that their program does not have a positive impact. At this point, two 
reactions are possible: a sudden realization of all the practical constraints that will make an evaluation 
impossible; or a renewed commitment to learn.  
In Glennerster and Takaravasha (2013), page 20, we quote Rukmini Banerji of Pratham at the launch of 
an evaluation of Pratham’s flagship “Read India” program: 
“And of course [the researchers] may find that it doesn’t work. But if it doesn’t work, we 
need to know that. We owe it to ourselves and the communities we work with not to 
waste their and our time and resources on a program that does not help children learn. 
If we find that this program isn’t working, we will go and develop something that will.”1 
This is the kind of commitment that makes an ideal partner. It is not just that an unwilling partner can 
throw obstacles in the path of an effective evaluation. An implementation partner needs to be an active 
and committed member of the evaluation team. There will inevitably be problems that come up during 
the evaluation process that the implementer will have to help solve, often at a financial or time cost to 
                                                            
1 This quote reflects my memory of Rukmini’s speech. 


themselves. The baseline may run behind schedule and implementation will need to be delayed until it 
is complete; transport costs of the program might be higher as implementation communities end up 
being further apart than they otherwise would be to allow for controls; when and where a program is to 
be rolled out may need to be set further in advance because of the evaluation; selection criteria must be 
written down and followed scrupulously in order to reduce the discretion of local staff in accepting 
people into the program; or some promising program areas may need to be left for the control group. 
Partners will only put up with these problems and actively help solve them if they fully appreciate the 
benefits of the evaluation being high quality and if they understand why these restrictions are necessary 
to a high-quality evaluation. Padmaja Reddy of Spandana provides a good example of this commitment. 
In the early stages of our evaluation of Spandana’s microcredit product we became aware that credit 
officers from Spandana were going into some control areas to recruit microcredit clients. Only 
Padmaja’s active intervention managed to stop this activity, which would have undermined the entire 
experiment if left unchecked.  
Commitment to the evaluation needs to come from many levels of the organization. If the headquarters 
in Delhi want to do an impact evaluation but the local staff don’t, it is not advisable for HQ to force the 
evaluation through because it is the staff at the local level who will need to be deeply involved in 
working through the details with the researcher. Similarly, if the local staff are committed but the HQ is 
not, there will not be support for the extra time and cost the local staff will need to expend to 
participate in the study. Worst of all is when a funder forces an unwilling implementer to do an RCT run 
by a researcher. My own and others’ bitter experience suggests that being involved in a scenario of this 
kind will suck up months of a researcher’s time trying to come up with evaluation designs that the 
implementer will find some way to object to.  
If this level of commitment to discovering the unvarnished truth sounds a little optimistic, there are 
practical ways to make an impact evaluation less threatening to a partner. An implementer who runs 
many types of programs has less at stake from an impact evaluation of one of their programs than an 
organization with a single signature program. Another option is to test different variants of a program 
rather than the impact of the program itself. For example, testing the pros and cons of weekly versus 
monthly repayment of microcredit loans (Field, Pande, Papp, and Park 2012) is less threatening than 
testing the impact of microcredit loans. In some cases researchers have started relationships with 
implementers by testing a question that is less threatening (although potentially less interesting). As the 
partnership has built up trust, the implementing partner has opened up more and more of their 
portfolio to rigorous testing.  
vii) 
Trade-offs between partner criteria 
An important concern is that a partner that is committed to knowing the truth about the effect of the 
program, understands randomization, and has the time and expertize to invest in a serious evaluation 
partnership, is unlikely to be representative of other implementers. We may worry that there is a 
systematic bias in the programs that are evaluated. Allcott (2015) examines 111 RCTs of similar 
programs to encourage energy conservation across the US. He finds that the program was more 
effective in the first ten sites to adopt the program and be evaluated than those that adopted and were 


evaluated later. This holds true even after correcting for observable differences between sites. He 
suggests that utilities in areas that were particularly keen to reduce energy signed up to the program 
earlier and also had clients who responded more to conservation messages. Note that in this case 
evaluation and program adoption are a single package. Allcott’s estimation of site selection bias 
combines two possible biases: the program is more effective for those who 1) are early adopters and 2) 
are willing to be evaluated. Allcott is not able to test whether those who are willing to evaluate are likely 
to run higher quality programs because, in his case, the programs are all run by a single operator at 
different sites.  
Whether we want to prioritize having a representative partner or a highly committed partner depends 
on the objective of the research. If we are testing an underlying human behavior—such as a willingness 
to pay now for benefits in the future—the representativeness of the partner may be less relevant. If we 
want to know whether a type of program, as it is usually implemented, works, we will want to prioritize 
working with a representative partner. Note that “does this type of program work” is not necessarily a 
more policy-relevant question than a more general question about human behavior. By their nature, 
more general questions generalize better and can be applied to a wider range of policy questions.        
 
What can a researcher do to foster a good partnership with an implementing organization? 
We have set out a long list of characteristics a researcher wants in an implementing partner. But what 
does an implementer want in a research partner, and how can a researcher make him- or herself a 
better partner?  
i) 
Answer questions the partner wants answered 
Start by listening. A researcher will go into a partnership with ideas about what they want to test, but it 
is important to understand what the implementer wants to learn from the partnership. Try to include a 
component of the evaluation that answers the key questions of the implementer as well as elements 
that answer the key researcher questions. For example, sometimes these questions don’t require 
another arm to be added to the study, but rather some good monitoring data or quantitative descriptive 
data of conditions in the population to be collected.  
ii) 
Be flexible about the evaluation design 
The research design a researcher has in their head when they start a partnership dialogue is almost 
never the design that ends up being implemented. It is critical to respond flexibly to the practical 
concerns raised by the implementer. One of the main reasons that randomized evaluations have taken 
off in development in the last twenty years is because a range of tools have been developed to 
introduce an element of randomization in different ways. It is important to go into a conversation with a 
partner with all those tools in mind and use the flexibility they provide to achieve a rigorous study that 
also takes into account the concerns of the implementer.  


A common concern implementers have about randomization is that they will lose the ability to choose 
the individuals or communities that they think are most likely to benefit from their intervention. They 
may worry a community mobilization program will not work if the community is too large and lacks 
cohesiveness, or is too small to have the resources to participate fully. A training program may want to 
enroll students that have some education but not too much. These concerns are relatively easy to deal 
with: agree to drop individuals or communities that don’t fit the criteria as long as there are enough 
remaining to randomize some into treatment and some into control. This may require expanding the 
geographic scope of the program. Randomization in the bubble can be a useful design in dealing with 
these concerns.  
Randomized phase-in designs are also useful for addressing implementer concerns, although they come 
with important downsides. (Glennerster and Takavarasha [2013] detail the pros and cons of different 
randomization techniques.) 
There are limits to the flexibility that can and should be shown. If an implementing organization 
repeatedly turns down many different research designs that are carefully tailored to address concerns 
that have been raised in previous conversations, at some point the researcher needs to assess whether 
the implementer wants the evaluation to succeed. This is a very hard judgment to make and is often 
clouded by an unwillingness to walk away from an idea that the researcher has invested a lot of time in. 
The key question to focus on in this situation is whether the implementer is also trying to overcome the 
practical obstacles to the evaluation. It not, then it probably makes sense to walk away and let go of the 
sunk costs already invested. Better to walk now than be forced to walk away later when even more time 
and money has been invested.  
iii) 
Share expertise 
Many partners are interested in learning more about impact evaluation as part of the process of 
engaging with a researcher on an evaluation. Take the time to explain the impact evaluation techniques 
to them and involve them in every step of the process. Offer to do a training on randomized evaluations 
for staff at the organization or run a workshop on Stata. Having an organization-wide understanding of 
randomized evaluations also has important benefits for the research. In Bangladesh, employees of the 
Bangladesh Development Society were so well versed in the logic of RCTs that they intervened when 
they noticed girls attending program activities from surrounding communities. They explained to the 
communities (unprompted) that this could contaminate the control group and asked that only local girls 
attend.   
Researchers often have considerable expertise in specific elements of program design, including 
monitoring systems and incentives, as well as knowing about potential sources of funding--all of which 
can be highly valued by implementers. Many researchers end up providing technical assistance on 
monitoring systems and program design that go well beyond the program being evaluated. The good 
will earned is invaluable when difficult issues arise later in the evaluation process. 
iv) 
Provide intermediate products 


While implementing partners benefit from the final evaluation results, the timescales of project funding 
and reporting are very different from academic timelines. Often an implementing organization will need 
to seek funding to keep the program going before the endline is in place and several years before the 
final evaluation report is complete. It is therefore very helpful to provide intermediate outputs. These 
can include: a write-up of a needs assessment in which the researcher draws on existing data and/or 
qualitative work that is used in project design; a description of similar programs elsewhere; a baseline 
report that provides detailed descriptive data of the conditions at the start of the program; or regular 
monitoring reports from any ongoing monitoring of project implementation the researchers are doing.  
Usually researchers collect these data but don’t write them up until the final paper. Being conscious of 
the implementers’ different timescale and getting these products out early can make them much more 
useful.  
v) 
Have a local presence and keep in frequent contact 
Partnerships take work and face time. A field experiment is not something you set up, walk away from, 
and come back to sometime later to discover the results. Things will happen, especially in developing 
countries: strikes, funding cuts, price rises, Ebola outbreaks. It is important to have a member of the 
research team on the ground to help the implementing partner think through how to deal with minor 
and major shocks in a way that fits the needs of both the implementer and the researcher. Even in the 
middle of multiyear projects I have weekly calls with my research assistants, who either sit in the offices 
of the implementer or visit them frequently. We always have plenty to talk about. I also visit the 
research site once and often twice a year. Common issues that come up during the evaluation are lower-
than-expected program take-up, higher-than-expected costs of running the program, uneven 
implementation quality, and new ideas on how to improve the program.   
Special considerations when partnering with governments 
Working with government partners has particular benefits and challenges. On the benefit side, 
governments often have substantial resources at their disposal and their geographic reach is expansive. 
Thus, for example, Olken et al. (2014) were able to randomize at the level of subdistrict in Indonesia 
with 1.8 million target beneficiaries in treatment areas. Governments also collect a lot of data on 
individuals such as test scores for children, earnings for adults, and encounters with the criminal justice 
system. While it may be possible to access these data even if the government is not the implementer of 
the program being evaluated, a formal partnership makes doing so much easier. Administrative data can 
enable researchers to assess impacts without extensive surveys. 
This is particularly beneficial for study designs that require large samples sizes and/or long-term 
tracking. For example, Angrist et al. (2006) are able to follow up with winners and losers of a lottery for 
vouchers to attend private school in Colombia by linking winners to a centralized college entry exam 
seven years after the vouchers were issued. In ongoing work, Bettinger et al. link the same voucher 
winners and losers to government tax and earnings data, 17 years after the lottery. Governments' wide 
reach makes it possible to randomize on populations that are representative of large geographic units. 
Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2011) test the impact of teacher incentive pay in a representative 


sample of rural schools across the state of Andhra Pradesh, meaning their results are valid across a 
population of 60 million.2  
Another benefit of working with governments is that they have the ability to scale up a program to a 
large number of people if a pilot is found to be effective.  If the evaluation is of a government 
implemented pilot this may ease, though not necessarily erase, the concern that the scale-up will not be 
implemented as well as the pilot. Governments may also find the results from such a pilot more 
persuasive than one conducted by another organization. In 2012, Banerjee, Hanna, and Olken worked 
with the Government of Indonesia to test how providing individual ID cards to recipients of government-
subsidized rice (which indicated the amount and price of rice they were eligible for) could reduce 
corruption in the distribution system. The results showed that the cards increased the subsidy received 
by targeted recipients by 25 percent, so the government scaled up the ID card program, reaching 66 
million people. The time from evaluation design to scale-up was about a year.   
Some issues can only be examined by working with governments: for example, manipulating how tax 
collectors are rewarded (Khan, Khwaja, and Olken 2014); how police are trained and rewarded 
(Banerjee, Duflo, and Keniston 2012); or how firms' emissions into the environment are regulated (Duflo 
et al. 2012).   
With these benefits, however, come considerable costs. Governments can be slow-moving and less able 
or willing to test out-of-the-box solutions than NGOs. It may be particularly difficult to run more theory-
oriented field experiments with governments. They tend to be less interested in answering an abstract 
question, the answer to which could inform many policies but would not be scaled up as a specific 
program. Governments can also find it harder than NGOs to provide services only to a limited group of 
needy citizens. Some governments have laws requiring them to treat citizens of equivalent need equally. 
When the Government of France wanted to test programs using randomized trials they first had to 
change the constitution to make this possible. Additionally, staff turnover in governments can be high as 
civil servants are transferred regularly. This makes it even more important to build support at different 
levels of government: if the RCT has support from the minister but not the bureaucrats, then it is likely 
to die with the next cabinet reshuffle. An election can lead to a dramatic change in policy priorities and 
personnel at the same time. It can also lead to paralysis for a period both before and after an election, 
even if the program being evaluated has bipartisan support. As an example, an RCT I was involved in 
collapsed when none of the planned monitoring could take place because a newly elected government 
froze all nonessential expenditure while they thought through new priorities. In another instance a 
survey had to be suspended just as it was about to go into the field because of a national exchange rate 
crunch, which again led to a freeze. Government budget shortfalls and last minute crunches are not 
confined to developing countries. Finally, it is worth recognizing that governments can renege on any 
agreement with impunity. There is not much a researcher can do when a government decides to fill a 
shortfall in a program budget with money set aside for, say, the endline.  
                                                            
2 Andhra Pradesh has a population of 80 million and is 75 percent rural. 


Many of the strategies discussed above for fostering partnerships in general are particularly important 
for fostering partnerships with governments. Government partners are in a powerful position vis-à-vis 
the researcher, so it is important to listen hard to what they want. They often work within short political 
timelines, so delivering intermediate products such as baseline reports can be key for keeping them 
engaged.   
Working with governments often requires a more formal approach to partnership than working with 
NGOs. Governments often require a memorandum of understanding that sets out clear expectations for 
both parties. Discussions may be going well at the practical implementation level, but any final 
decision—even a relatively small one--is likely to require sign-off from someone senior. It is important to 
build extra time into the schedule to account for this. Government procurement rules can also cause 
considerable delay. For example, if we decided that an intervention needs a leaflet to explain the study 
to participants, the government may require a competitive bid for the printing of the leaflet, leading to 
several months delay. Having some independent funding that does not run through the government can 
be very helpful in easing some of these constraints: a researcher can come in and offer to pay for a 
leaflet, or for additional monitoring, etc. Independent funding can also help keep the research going if 
the government faces short-run liquidity constraints.  
Being the first to do something might be exciting for an NGO but can make a government nervous as it 
exposes them to criticism. Thinking through the optics of the experiment (i.e., how it would look on the 
front page of a newspaper) can help alleviate concern. Another strategy is to bring in an official from 
another department or country who has worked on an experiment before, preferably of a similar type.  
It is much more reassuring for officials to talk to other officials than it is to hear from a researcher. 
Policymakers often have a healthy skepticism of researchers who want to provide advice about how to 
measure or improve a program, especially those coming from another country, state or region. It is 
important for researchers to prove their relevance and their local knowledge. A mix of humility, a desire 
to learn from the policymaker, and a lot of homework about local conditions can help. I have seen 
policymakers visibly relax and start to engage when they hear from a researcher about their on-the-
ground experience. A well-placed anecdote about a conversation with a farmer in Kenema or a teacher 
in Pittsburgh can be critical for building credibility. 
 
Self-implementation 
The major benefit of not working with an implementing partner, but implementing the intervention as a 
researcher, is the high degree of flexibility to precisely test the intervention or range of interventions. In 
order to understand how and why a particular program has the impact it has, we may want to take it 
apart and test different elements separately and together, and it may be hard to find an implementer 
that is willing to do this. For example, community-driven development (CDD) is a very common 
development program that combines the provision of block grants for locally designed projects to 
communities with facilitation in order to encourage inclusive decision making in selecting the programs. 
For many years, researchers have wanted to test the marginal benefit of the facilitation, but this would 


involve providing some grants without facilitation, something most implementers of CDD are strongly 
opposed to. The result is that most studies have tested the combination of grants and facilitation (Casey, 
Glennerster and Miguel 2012; Fearon, Humphreys, and Weinstein 2009; Humphreys, Sanchez de la 
Sierra, and van der Windt 2012; and Beath, Christia, and Enikolopov 2013) .  
We may want to compare two very different types of programs that are designed to deliver the same 
outcome against each other. But individual implementers may specialize in doing program A or program 
B, with none willing and able to do A in some randomly determined locations and B in others.  We could 
try and find two implementers who would cooperate on where they did their respective intervention, 
but this kind of tripartite collaboration is likely to be exceptionally difficult. Even if we succeed it will be 
impossible to disentangle the differential impact of program A versus B from the impact of differential 
implementation skill of the organizations running each. A good example of this is the potential 
comparison between any program and cash. It is often useful to compare the effectiveness of a program 
in achieving a given objective to providing cash in achieving the same outcome. As with the CDD 
example above, most implementers are reluctant to simply hand out cash (an exception is GiveDirectly, 
which was started by academic economists with the ultimately correct view that giving out cash might 
be an effective way to help the poor with few downsides [Haushofer and Shapiro 2013]). It is sometimes 
possible to reach a compromise with partners to do this type of comparison. A study in Bangladesh 
randomized different elements of Save the Children’s girls' empowerment program but also added an 
arm with a (noncash) incentive to delay marriage. While not part of the original program, Save the 
Children agreed to a hybrid arrangement where the researchers took the responsibility for designing, 
raising the funding for, and helping to implement the noncash delivery program, while Save the Children 
supported the delivery of the noncash incentive through its existing food distribution system and 
provided support in implementation so that this element closely resembled a Save the Children program  
(Field, Glennerster, Nazneen, Pimkina, and Sen, ongoing).3    
The flexibility of self-implementation is particularly useful when we want to test a theory of underlying 
human behavior through an intervention that may not have a lot of practical benefit in itself. Lab 
experiments are an extreme form of this. Implementing partners are unlikely to want to run a lab 
experiment and they don’t have as much expertise to contribute as this is far removed from what they 
normally do. But lab experiments can be very useful in testing precise hypotheses because they isolate 
very specific differences between arms. Many RCTs outside the lab are effectively somewhere between 
lab experiments and program evaluations.  
A series of RCTs on take-up of health prevention products are a good example of the continuum 
between program evaluation and lab experiments, and how researchers shift from working with 
implementers to implementing themselves through this continuum. Kremer and Miguel (2007) worked 
with a nongovernmental organization to randomize the price at which deworming pills were provided as 
part of a larger program. Ashraf, Berry, and Shapiro (2010) sought to understand whether price 
influenced use of health products (something that was not an issue for deworming pills) and to 
                                                            
3 A description of this ongoing study can be found at http://www.povertyactionlab.org/evaluation/empowering-
girls-rural-bangladesh 


distinguish between a psychological commitment effect of paying for a product and a selection effect. 
To do this, people went door to door selling dilute chlorine at randomly selected prices. Some of those 
who agreed to buy the chlorine at a given price then received a discount, or were surprised to receive 
the chlorine for free. Even though this two-stage pricing did not much resemble a normal NGO program, 
the researchers were able to work with Population Services International (PSI) to implement it because 
of the long-run relationship between the researchers and PSI and PSI’s realization of the value of 
understanding the underlying behavior of health consumers in designing their future programs.4 
Hoffman, Barrett, and Just (2009) in contrast, implemented their own program in which they 
randomized the price at which people were offered bed-nets. To abstract from cash constraints, they 
provided subjects with enough cash to purchase a net prior to the offer of sale. They also looked at loss 
aversion by offering to purchase nets from individuals once they had bought them. While this design 
was very helpful in distinguishing different theories of consumer behavior with respect to preventive 
health, no one would think it was a good way to run a bed-net distribution program, so working with an 
implementing partner was unlikely to be an option (Hoffman was also a graduate student at the time, 
meaning she had not developed the long-run partnerships with implementing organizations that 
Kremer, Miguel, and Ashraf had developed).   
Researchers sometimes choose to work through research organizations as implementers or create new 
implementing organizations because their empirical and theoretical work suggests to them a new 
strategy that has the potential to be effective at scale. In these cases researchers often work through 
the design of the program and the research simultaneously. Chlorine Dispensers for Safe Water and 
StickK are examples where researchers helped create new products and organizations to scale these 
products, which were also evaluated through field experiments.5  
Offsetting these important benefits of self-implementation are important disadvantages: it takes an 
extraordinary amount of focused attention and work to implement a complex program well; the 
researcher does not benefit from the insights of the implementer who usually knows a lot about the 
local context; questions may be raised about the extent to which the results will generalize to a program 
implemented not by nonresearch organizations; and different and more complicated ethical questions 
arise with researcher-implemented programs. As part of nonprofit universities, academics may be 
restricted from political advocacy, which may limit their ability to self-implement election work. (I 
address these last two points in the ethics section.) 
It is easy for researchers to underestimate the challenges in implementing a program directly, 
particularly in a developing country. It is common for researchers, particularly junior ones, to look at the 
overhead costs that implementing organizations charge and decide it would be cheaper to implement 
the program themselves, only to realize halfway through the experiment why others charge high 
                                                            
4 Cohen and Dupas (2010) used a similar design as Ashraf et al. but with bed-nets in Kenya, and implemented 
through the research organization Innovations for Poverty Action. 
5 In the case of chlorine dispensers, the program was originally implemented by ICS Africa, then by Innovations for 
Poverty Action where more testing with scaling was done, before being spun off to Evidence Action. More about 
Dispensers for Safe Water can be found at http://www.evidenceaction.org/dispensers/. For more on StickK, see 
http://www.stickk.com/. 


overheads. Permits are hard to get, supplies don’t arrive on time, staff get sick or quit, hurricanes 
happen. It is hard enough to run the RCT: running the implementation at the same time is a major 
headache. Nor do researchers necessarily have a comparative advantage in most implementation tasks 
such as logistics and human-resource management. This is another reason why it is more common for 
researchers to self-implement the type of RCTs that have quick turnaround, and/or involve a lab in the 
field: the key tasks of implementation (such as determining the precise wording of a behavioral 
intervention in a lab) are closer to the comparative advantage of a researcher and long-term 
employment of staff is not required. 
To what extent can we generalize the results from researcher-led RCTs? Vivalt (2015), in a meta-analysis 
of field experiments in developing countries, finds that the identity of the organization running the 
program is the largest predictor of impact within studies of the same type of program. This suggests that 
the results from a researcher-implemented program may not necessarily translate into the same impact 
if the program were run by a government. However, whether this is a drawback to studies of researcher-
implemented programs depends a lot on what type of lesson we are seeking to draw from a study and 
the type of intervention that is being tested. As we have discussed, the objective of researcher-led 
implementation is often to tease out an underlying behavior rather than to test whether a program 
would be effective at scale. In this case, the fact that an NGO or government might implement the 
program differently than a researcher is not relevant to achieving the objectives of the study. No NGO is 
going to implement Hoffmann et al.’s bed-net distribution the way they implemented it, but that does 
not undermine the general lesson about loss aversion that the RCT provides. A point that is often missed 
is that lessons about human behavior that often come from researcher-implemented studies or studies 
that are not designed to test scalable interventions are, in some ways, more generalizable than lessons 
from evaluations of specific programs precisely because they seek to test more theoretical questions.  
But what if the objective of an RCT is to draw lessons about whether a particular type of intervention is 
effective in achieving certain outcomes and whether this type of program should be scaled? How useful 
are evaluations of researcher-implemented programs then? To understand this we need to think 
through why researcher-implemented programs may be different from those implemented by others.  
Some researcher-implemented programs are criticized as not being a valid test of an approach because 
researchers do not have the expertise to run a program properly. One possibility is to hire someone with 
the technical capacity the researcher does not have. In certain disciplines (such as medicine or 
agronomy) an expert’s qualifications can be documented and their advice can be validated by 
independent experts. Thus Cole and Fernando (2012) evaluated a phone-based agricultural extension 
program. To do this they needed an agricultural expert. The advice this expert gave is easy to assess. But 
in other areas this external validation of the quality of implementation is harder to do. For example, if an 
economics researcher ran and evaluated a program on community mobilization and found no impact, 
this is likely to carry less weight than a null result from a program evaluation by a well-known and 
respected implementer of community mobilization programs.   
A more common concern is that researcher-implemented programs are not representative because they 
are too well-implemented. Researchers tend to have a high level of education and, during the 


evaluation, will be focusing a lot of attention on a relatively small number of participants. It is, 
unfortunately, not typical to have so many highly educated people focus on the implementation of a 
program in a relatively small area. People of equivalent education levels in implementation 
organizations tend to be responsible for a very large number of programs often covering hundreds of 
thousands of people. This is not just an issue for researcher-implemented programs. Programs that are 
evaluated often get greater scrutiny than those that are not being evaluated. Again, however, the extent 
to which this is a problem depends on the objective of the study. 
If a study is designed to test proof-of-concept, then researcher focus (as an implementer or just as an 
engaged partner) is not a problem. A proof-of-concept study asks the question, “What is the impact of 
an intervention if it is implemented as well as it could be?” Medical and public-health trials are often 
proof-of-concept studies. For example, it is useful to know whether addressing anemia increases 
productivity, even if this involves an intensive intervention in which households are given iron pills and 
are visited regularly to make sure there is high compliance (Thomas et al. 2003). If the study finds such a 
link, the question remains how best to increase iron uptake in a sustainable way. Studies of researcher-
implemented programs are often proof-of-concept studies.  
An alternative approach for ensuring that wider lessons can be learned from researcher-implemented 
studies is for the researcher to very carefully document implementation steps so that it is clear what the 
implementation was that was tested, and how others could replicate it. This sort of monitoring can be 
used to assess whether implementation quality declines as the program is scaled. This approach works 
best when quality is easy to measure. For example, it is possible to objectively monitor how often a 
chlorine dispenser is empty and therefore judge the extent to which program quality deteriorates as it is 
scaled and less attention is paid to each community. It is much harder to judge how the quality of a 
mentoring program changes as it is scaled. This point is not only relevant to researcher-implemented 
programs, but it is particularly relevant for them.   
In summary, then, when deciding whether to implement a program as a researcher it is important to 
think through the objectives of the study. If it is a short-lived, small-scale experiment with quite 
theoretical objectives where subtle differences in implementation are crucial to the design, self-
implementation may be a good approach. If the objective is to test a proof of concept, and there are 
objective ways to measure the quality of implementation, then self-implementation may be possible--
but not necessarily advisable--given the work involved. But for the vast majority of field experiments, 
the benefits of self-implementation do not outweigh the costs. In particular, researchers isolate 
themselves from potentially useful partners.   
Some commentators have concluded that the involvement of researchers in the implementation of 
programs raises important ethical issues. The issue has arisen mainly in the context of field experiments 
around elections.6 We discuss this in the ethics section below.  
                                                            
6 A get-out-the-vote field experiment in Montana caused considerable debate about research ethics when the 
fliers used in the experiment inappropriately used the Montana State seal. However, questions were also raised 
about whether it was ethical to conduct research that might influence the outcome of an election. For further 


 
B. Preparing for Practical Pitfalls in Field Experiments 
When running a field experiment it is best to prepare for the worst. Some crises cannot be foreseen: in 
one 12-month period my field experiments were hit by Ebola, riots, a national strike, and a coup. The 
likelihood of unforeseen shocks makes it more critical to prepare for challenges that can be foreseen. 
Even with the best implementing partner there will be issues of compliance with the randomization 
protocol and take-up will be lower than you expect. Even with a team of experienced and well-trained 
enumerators, someone will try to make up the data and attrition will have to be addressed.  In this 
section we discuss strategies to combat these challenges. 
Noncompliance 
Despite our best efforts, there will always be people randomized to receive treatment who do not 
access the program and those who are randomized to the comparison group who manage to get access. 
Intention-to-treat estimates are still valid if there is a low level of noncompliance, but by reducing the 
contrast between treatment and comparison, noncompliance dramatically reduces power.7  Choosing 
the right partner, as discussed above, is key to compliance but so is designing a randomization protocol 
that is easy to follow. Program implementers have enough to deal with in making the program run 
smoothly. In the best designs they have no decisions to make related to the randomization protocol. 
Often the best strategy is to ensure that any front-line implementer works entirely with either 
treatment or control people, but never implements differently across arms. For example, Field, 
Glennerster, Nazneen, Pimkina and Sen (ongoing) compared two different versions of an empowerment 
program, but field supervisors who supervised many villages were always given villages running the 
same version of the program. The one case where it is sometimes possible to have front-line staff 
implement differently with different people is if they are following a script on a computer and the 
computer randomizes the script (Duflo et al. 2005). Karlan and Appel (2016) have many examples of 
field experiments gone wrong, many of which involved noncompliance. There are several cases of 
attempts to evaluate layering an additional element onto an existing program. The new element was 
simply added to the work load of existing program staff, was not their main focus nor expertise, and as a 
result the new element was implemented poorly and inconsistently.  
Even if program staff are implementing the program well and in line with the randomization protocol, 
take-up of the program may be disappointing. In Banerjee, Duflo, Glennerster, and Kinnan (2015), 
Spandana predicted that 80 percent of eligible women would take up their microcredit product. In 
planning the study we assumed this was an overestimate and predicted take-up of 60 percent. The 
actual take-up was less than 20 percent. Take-up is critical to power, so it is important to get right. If the 
program is being run elsewhere, one approach is to collect data on actual take-up in the other location. 
                                                                                                                                                                                               
discussion see, for example: https://thewpsa.wordpress.com/2014/10/25/messing-with-montana-get-out-the-
vote-experiment-raises-ethics-questions/ 
7 The minimum detectable effect (MDE) size is squared when it enters the power equation, so power is particularly 
sensitive to changes in the MDE. 


Alternatively, running a pilot on a small scale prior to the evaluation is useful for estimating take-up as 
well as to sort out the details of program and research implementation. Even then, take-up is likely to be 
lower in the main study than in the pilot as pilots often get a particularly high level of attention.   
Another driver of noncompliance is that randomization units which appear separable on paper are much 
messier on the ground. The clear clinic catchment areas delineated on maps by the ministry of health 
may bear little relationship to who actually attends which clinic. Government-imposed political 
boundaries such as towns, villages, or states do not always correspond to the patterns of daily 
interaction that are likely to drive program implementation and spillovers. Even the definition of 
household is not always straightforward: households are usually defined as those who eat together, but 
it may be hard to treat one part of a family and not the other part if they live in the same dwelling, even 
if they do not eat together. To prevent this type of noncompliance it is critical to establish natural 
randomization units that are informed by how people actually interact--not how they are meant to 
interact according to some government plan (Chapter 4 of Glennerster and Takavarasha [2013] covers 
this issue in greater depth). 
The most problematic form of noncompliance is the defier: people who take up treatment because they 
were randomized to control, or who don’t take it up because they were randomized to treatment. 
Unlike other forms of noncompliance, which just reduce power, defiers can bias results. Defiers are 
most likely to occur in information interventions because of the interaction of information provision 
with previous priors.8 If we are concerned about defiers we need to identify groups where they may be 
an issue (for example, by collecting baseline data on existing priors) and calculating heterogeneous 
effects. We can separately examine the effects of an information program on those where the 
information was in line with previous priors, was higher than previous priors, or lower than priors (see 
Glennerster and Takavarasha [2013] for more details on this subject).     
Even with the best preparation possible, things will go wrong. It is therefore essential to monitor 
compliance and take-up throughout the implementation phase, and provide feedback to the 
implementer so that they can fix any issues with implementing staff and redouble efforts at take-up. 
Data on who is not taking up the program can be very helpful to implementers in focusing their take up 
promotion strategies. Collecting data in the endline about who took up the program will be important in 
interpreting the results; for example, distinguishing between limited impact being driven by low take-up 
or by low impact among those who took up. These data are also needed for calculating treatment-on 
the-treated estimates where appropriate.  
 
Attrition 
                                                            
8 For example, we might tell people about the benefits of wearing a seatbelt as a way of increasing the use of 
seatbelts, and thus further measuring their effectiveness. However, if some people previously had an overinflated 
view of the benefits of seatbelts, the information might actually make them less likely to use seatbelts. Our 
estimate of the information program would be valid, but the estimate of the effect of seatbelts would be incorrect 
if defiers are different from nondefiers in other aspects of their behavior. 


A high attrition rate can ruin an otherwise well-designed and implemented RCT. Most RCTs involve 
collecting panel data on the same people before and after the start of the intervention.  While it is 
possible to account for attrition in these studies by placing bounds on the estimated coefficient, unless 
attrition is very small, these bounds will be large, making it hard to draw precise conclusions from the 
results. Even RCTs that do not collect panel data still have to worry about attrition from the selected 
sample: if we randomly select people who were subject to a natural field experiment to measure its 
effects, but only reach a portion of those we sought to interview, our results could be biased.  
The following are some tips for keeping attrition low: 
i) 
Plan for more than one visit 
Whether the surveys are conducted in people’s homes, schools, or workplaces, some people will be 
absent on the day the enumerators come for the survey even when they have been warned in advance. 
Up to three separate visits may be needed to ensure that a high proportion of people are reached. 
ii) 
Track people where they are 
Simply returning to the same location repeatedly may not be sufficient if the respondent has moved. If 
children have dropped out of school, the enumerator needs to go to the child’s home, and if the 
outcome is child test scores, the test will need to be administered at home. If families have moved it 
may be necessary to track and interview people in their new locations. Baird, Hamory, and Miguel 
(2008) provide detail on the work of the Kenya Life Panel Survey, which has successfully tracked 
adolescents (a particularly hard age group to track) from 1998–2011 as they completed their education, 
married, and moved into the workforce. In the first round, 19 percent had moved out of the district, and 
the team tracked respondents across Kenya as well as in Uganda, Tanzania, and even the UK.  
iii) 
Think carefully about the timing of data collection 
People are more or less willing or able to talk to enumerators depending on the time of day or year. 
Turn up in the middle of a work day and most people will not be at home. Call during dinner and they 
may not want to talk. Choosing the right time to collect data requires knowing your population well. It 
may also require paying enumerators extra to work outside normal working hours. Studies done at 
schools or workplaces have the advantage of keeping attrition down at relatively low cost as 
respondents are conveniently brought together in one location at specific times. Late afternoon or 
evening, when people have returned from work, is often a good time to interview people at their home. 
In rural Sierra Leone, enumerators stay in communities during surveys. This allows them to warn people 
the night before that they will want to interview them and arrange a mutually convenient time. It also 
means they are in the community at all times of the day, making it easier to find a time when people can 
be reached. 
Usually it is good to avoid doing a survey in traditionally high-travel months. August would be a terrible 
time to interview professionals in Paris, for example. The exception is if the study is tracking adolescents 
who may return to their parents’ house during specific periods, such as Thanksgiving in the US. When 


trying to track girls for our study in Bangladesh, we reduced our attrition by having a final round during 
Eid, a time when girls who are working in factories in Dhaka or have left for marriage traditionally return 
to their parents' houses.  
iv) 
Collect tracking data at baseline 
The baseline questionnaire should include a “tracking module” which asks questions like, “If you moved, 
who in the local community would know where you moved to, but would not move with you?” The 
tracking module should ask for phone numbers of the respondent and their relations. 
v) 
Can data be collected from people other than the participant? 
Even if people have moved, or children have dropped out of school, it may be possible to collect some 
data on them from others who know them, which will minimize the costs of tracking and reduce 
attrition. Schools may know when a child dropped out. A child’s peers may know if a girl got pregnant 
even if they are not still in school. Clinics may have data on when a patient stopped collecting their 
medicine and reporting for regular checkups (but note that the respondent's permission to get this data 
must be collected at baseline). 
vi) 
Make the survey as costless to answer as possible 
Long surveys that ask stressful questions are likely to get lower response rates. The appropriate length 
depends on the respondent and means of data collection. Even if respondents finish the baseline survey, 
they may deliberately make sure they are out in subsequent rounds if the survey is too long. Children 
have shorter attention spans so need shorter surveys. Phone surveys also need to be shorter than in-
person surveys. If there are questions that might prompt someone to end the interview, such as 
questions on spousal abuse, these should be put at the end of the survey so that if the interview is 
terminated, only a limited amount of data are lost.   
vii) 
Specify targets on attrition, not on the number of attempts made 
It is common to specify the number of times an enumerator should attempt to reach a given 
respondent, but this can set up inefficient incentives. An enumerator has private information about 
when it is best to return to a household to maximize the chance of reaching the respondent, and it is 
important for them to have an incentive to utilize this (without having such a strong incentive to reduce 
attrition that they will fake data). Consider a phone survey where an enumerator has been given a list of 
people to call and told to call each at least three times. The easiest way to reach this goal is to call at a 
time when it is unlikely the person will be in and then call three times immediately one after each other. 
Attrition would be terrible in this scenario. If the enumerator is given a list of names and told to do what 
they can to reach as many as possible, they will learn about what times of the day seem to get high 
response rates, will ask when people might be available, and try the same person at different times of 
day.    
viii) 
Consider an incentive 


Surveys take a lot of time and it may be appropriate to compensate people for this time. If the survey is 
long or a respondent needs to travel to a clinic or testing center to complete it, a small incentive may be 
useful in reducing the attrition rate. This is particularly true for panel surveys where the respondent 
knows that the survey will be long. Any incentive needs to be cleared with the Institutional Review 
Board (IRB), which assesses the ethics of the study to ensure that people are not taking untoward risks 
because of the incentive. Compensating people for their time is usually seen as ethical by IRBs. 
Incentives that have been used include small backpacks for children, bars of soap, and seasoning cubes 
for cooking.   
Poor data quality 
The challenges of collecting high-quality data are not unique to field experiments, and some field 
experiments rely on administrative data. However, administrative data are often unavailable to 
researchers, not collected on all individuals, are unreliable, or not detailed enough for the researcher’s 
needs, forcing the researcher to collect their own data. Data collection is hard and difficult to monitor 
which means enumerators can be tempted to take shortcuts and, in the extreme, make up data. 
An essential part of data collection is therefore monitoring the quality of data, and critical to this is the 
back-check process.  A highly skilled enumerator (usually a supervisor) goes back and re-asks a few 
questions from a randomly chosen subsample of respondents. The consistency between the two 
responses is then assessed. Many researchers do “back-checks” of this kind on 10 percent of the sample. 
Because we need enough data to make this a valid comparison for larger surveys, the rate can be lower 
than this, and for smaller surveys it should be higher. The back-check survey does not have to be 
comprehensive. Indeed, the back-check should be kept short to avoid respondents becoming annoyed 
at being asked the same questions twice. One reason for the back-check is to make sure the enumerator 
is not making up data. Asking whether the respondent has been interviewed recently, and asking simple 
questions to which the respondent’s answer is unlikely to change in the space of a few days, are useful 
for achieving this. Enumerators should be warned that back-checks will take place on an unannounced 
basis. It is good practice to make sure all enumerators have their work back-checked at least once in the 
first few days of a survey and to discuss any important discrepancies between the two surveys with the 
enumerator. It should not be assumed, however, that all discrepancies are the fault of the enumerator. 
Respondents will often change their response depending on the day and how they are feeling, even 
when they are asked about slow-moving variables such as age or size of household. 
Technology is providing an increasing range of options for monitoring enumerators. With paper-based 
surveys, monitoring has to rely on surprise visits from external monitors to check that the enumerator is 
in the right place at the right time. The monitor can also observe part of the interview to see if the 
enumerator is asking the questions well and appropriately recording answers. Paper checks can also be 
done, but the team supervisor can pick up if certain questions are being missed or if a given enumerator 
has a high rate of failing to find target households. With GPS devices, enumerators can be tracked more 
closely. Even if we don’t need to have the GPS coordinates of the interviewed household for the 
analysis, having enumerators record it helps ensure that they actually visited the household. Electronic 
data collection now allows part or all of the interview to be recorded. Unlike having a supervisor 


listening over their shoulder, an enumerator does not know when the recording is on or which part of 
the interview recording will be checked, providing added motivation to perform well.  
Electronic data collection also allows incoming data to be assessed while the survey is still in the field. By 
looking for patterns it is possible to find and correct errors enumerators may be making, and in worse 
case scenarios to terminate employment. Warning signs include high variation between the answers 
collected by back-checkers and enumerators, high rates of failing to find target households, and lower 
than average duration of interviews (measured by comparing the recorded start and end time of the 
interview). Surveys usually have important trigger questions in a survey which, depending on the 
respondent's answer, can change the survey's length. In a demographic survey there will be many 
questions for each pregnancy a woman has had; in an agriculture survey there will be lots of questions 
for each crop a famer grows. Enumerators who want to keep their workload down have an incentive to 
have respondents answer a smaller number to these key trigger questions. Checking to see if certain 
enumerators have lower than average responses to these trigger questions is a good way to spot poor-
quality enumerators. These trigger questions are also important to check during the back-check process. 
Back-checking is not able to solve the problem of respondents not understanding the question, 
systematic under- or over-reporting (which may be the result of, for example, social desirability bias), 
not knowing the answer, or being tired and inaccurate. Many of the chapters in this book discuss good 
practice in measurement. But it is also important to do extensive field testing in a given location with a 
survey instrument because questions that work with one population may not be well understood by 
another. It may also be necessary to develop locally relevant indicators especially for hard to measure 
and culturally specific outcomes such as social capital. Prior to the launch of the baseline survey for and 
evaluation of community driven development program in Sierra Leone, Casey spent a year working with 
local partners to develop locally relevant indicators of collective action, trust, and participation (Casey, 
Glennerster, and Miguel 2012). There is a tension, however, between relying on locally relevant 
indicators and internationally recognized indicators that can be used to benchmark levels and impacts 
across countries. If every study uses a different way of measuring outcomes it is hard to compare cost-
effectiveness across projects because there is no single standard of effectiveness.  Therefore, it is usually 
a good idea to have a mix of locally tailored and internationally recognized indicators. For example, in 
education studies we will want a test of learning that is appropriate to the level of learning in the 
population where the experiment takes place. However, if we are to compare program effectiveness 
across sites we want to also include some benchmark questions that can be compared across studies. 
For more discussion, see the education chapter in this volume.  
Avoiding systematic differences in data collection between treatment and comparison 
Most measurement issues that a researcher conducting an RCT has to deal with are similar to those 
faced by researchers working on studies using other methodologies. There are, however, a few issues 
that a RCT researcher has to be particularly concerned about. All of these boil down to the need for data 
to be collected in the same way in the treatment and comparison group and to avoid the intervention 
interacting with the way people report data.  


Programs often collect a lot of data as part of their regular monitoring processes. These monitoring data 
can be very useful for interpreting the results of an RCT. For example, they can help us distinguish 
whether a null effect was due to a poorly implemented program or due to little impact from a well- 
implemented program. However, these program data should usually not be used to measure outcomes. 
If the program is operating only in the treatment area then there is no process data in the comparison 
areas, making a comparison impossible. If we use program process data in the treatment area and try to 
collect similar data in the comparison areas, we will never know if any difference in measured outcomes 
is due to a real underlying difference in outcomes or due to a difference in measurement processes in 
treatment and comparison. For example, if data are collected by program staff in treatment areas and 
by professional enumerators in comparison areas, there is a risk that professional enumerators are 
better at probing respondents and checking inconsistent answers, and thus end up with systematically 
different outcomes than program staff.  
In general, using program staff to collect outcome data is problematic as it can accentuate the risk of 
social desirability bias. Respondents may, for example, find it particularly awkward to admit to having 
practiced unsafe sex when asked by the person who trained them in the dangers of unsafe sexual 
practices. Data collection is also hard to do well, and there are considerable benefits from having it 
conducted by people who are highly experienced and motivated to do a good job because their future 
career prospects rely on them performing the tasks well. 
The one exception where process data are sometimes used to measure outcomes is when the RCT takes 
place within a sample in which everyone participates in the program, the randomization is into different 
types of program participation, and process data are collected routinely on those in treatment and 
comparison in identical ways. For example, if different borrowers within the same credit organization 
are randomized to receive alternative versions of the credit contract and repayment is the outcome of 
interest, then the lender’s information on repayment rates can be used to compare outcomes for 
treatment and comparison clients (Giné and Karlan [2014] use this approach when looking at 
microcredit contracts, and DeLaat et al., ongoing,9 use this to look at farming cooperative contracts--
although both also collect survey data as well). Even in these cases it is useful to check the validity of the 
data by comparing self-reported data from surveys with administrative data from the implementing 
organization, especially if there is subjectivity in the measurement of outcomes. The concern is that to 
the extent that program staff are collecting process data and know which participants have been 
allocated to treatment and which to comparison, this knowledge and any biases they have about 
outcomes may influence how they record outcomes.  
Another temptation is to collect data on the treatment group at a different time than the comparison 
group. For example, if the partner is pushing to get the program implemented quickly they may request 
that baseline data are collected in the treatment area first so that the program can start, with data 
collection done in comparison areas later. This timing difference compromises the difference between 
treatment and comparison data and should be avoided. 
                                                            
9 A description of this ongoing study can be found at: http://www.povertyactionlab.org/evaluation/encouraging-
adoption-rainwater-harvesting-tanks-through-collateralized-loans-kenya 


If the program has an impact on the relationship between the underlying outcome and the 
measurement of the outcome--even if data are collected in the same way in treatment and comparison-
-the data cannot be interpreted the same way in the two groups, thus undermining the validity of the 
experiment.  
This problem most often arises when a program provides an incentive to change a particular behavior 
which also changes the incentive to misreport the behavior. We want to be able to distinguish between 
the incentive leading to changes in actual behavior and the incentive leading to changes in reported 
behavior but not actual behavior. The more objective the measurement of the outcome, the less likely 
this is to happen, but if the incentive is high enough it is possible that it will induce substantial cheating 
that can corrupt even more objective measures. This is why it is preferable to use an outcome measure 
separate from the measure that is used for the incentive. For example, Dhaliwal and Hanna (2014) study 
a program in which medical worker attendance is monitored with a threat from officials that action will 
be taken against those with high absence rates. To judge if the program impacted attendance, the 
authors use random checks that are not linked to the official monitoring. Even if a program does not 
change respondents’ incentives to report an outcome, it may change the perceived social desirability of 
a behavior. For example, a program designed to encourage saving may make people more liable to 
report saving even if it does not change saving itself. In situations where the program may change social 
desirability it is imperative to rely on more objective measures of outcome, often including nonsurvey 
outcomes. Glennerster and Takavarasha (2013) have a catalogue of nonsurvey outcomes with the pros 
and cons of each.   
C. Ethics10 
Most field experiments involve humans as subjects in their research, and in this they are no different 
from most empirical economic research. But the expansion in the use of field experiments has been 
associated with more researchers, and more junior researchers, collecting their own data, especially in 
developing countries. There are a host of practical challenges associated with collecting and storing 
confidential data, which we discuss in this section. While most of the practical and ethical issues 
involved in running field experiments are common across any research that involves primary data 
collection, the intense collaboration between researchers and implementers common in field 
experiments does raise specific ethical questions, particularly in relation to the boundary between 
practice (which is regulated by national laws as well as norms and professional ethical standards) and 
research (which in most countries has separate formal regulatory structures).  
 
The basic principles underlying the US system of ethical research regulation were set out in the Belmont 
Report. This report was issued in 1978 by the US National Commission for the Protection of Human 
Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research and provides the basis for decisions about the ethics of 
research funded by most federal departments or agencies (Code of Federal Regulations, title 45, sec. 
                                                            
10 This section draws on Glennerster and Powers in The Oxford Handbook of Professional Economic Ethics, edited 
by George DeMartino and Deirdre N. McCloskey (2016).  


46.101).11  While the principles set out in the report were formulated in the US, they are reasonably 
general and are similar to the principles behind institutional review structures around the world.12 Since 
1978, hundreds of thousands of research studies have been evaluated against these principles, building 
up a considerable bank of experience in how to apply them in practice.13 The principles explicitly cover 
both medical and nonmedical studies and recognize that the level of review and safeguards should be 
adapted to the level of risk for a given study. This is important as social science research often has lower 
levels of risk than many medical studies.  
 
There are three key principles spelled out in the Belmont Report: 
i) 
Respect for persons  
People should be treated as autonomous agents. They have their own goals and have the right and 
ability to decide the best way to pursue them. In most cases this principle requires that researchers 
clearly lay out the risks and benefits of the study to potential participants and let them decide if they 
want to participate. The principle also recognizes that there are individuals who do not have full 
autonomy, such as children who may not understand the full risks and benefits of the research, or 
prisoners, who may not have freedom of action. Where autonomy is compromised, the researcher has 
to take special precautions.      
ii) 
Beneficence 
Researchers should avoid knowingly doing harm and seek to maximize the benefits and minimize the 
risks to subjects from research. However, avoiding all risk of harm is unrealistic and would prevent the 
gains to society that come from research. Therefore, risk of harm needs to be weighed against likely 
benefits to society that could flow from the research.   
iii) 
Justice 
The justice principle focuses on the distribution of costs and benefits of research. It seeks to avoid a 
situation where one group of people (for example the poor, or prisoners) bears the risks associated with 
research while another group receives the benefits. It recognizes that the individuals who take on the 
risks of research may not be precisely those who reap the benefits. Instead it aims to ensure that 
research is conducted amongst the types of people who will benefit from it.  
The principles are a compromise between two somewhat separate ethical traditions: a rights-based 
approach and a utilitarian approach. The beneficence principle’s emphasis on the need to weigh risks 
(which fall on the individual) and benefits (many of which accrue to society) is familiar to utilitarians and 
to economists. It is modified by the right to self-determination in the respect-for-persons principle: 
                                                            
11 Accessed at http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/humansubjects/guidance/45cfr46.html#46.101, August 15, 2013. 
12 For example, the Australian guidelines similarly include principles of justice, beneficence, and respect, although 
they also include a “research merit and integrity” principle. The three main principles underlying Canadian ethics 
review are respect for persons, concern for welfare, and justice.  
13 PubMed, a database of medical research, reports over 325,000 medical trials registered between 1978 and 2013. 


Research that imposes risks on the individual for the sake of society is ethical, but only if the individual 
understands the risks and is willing to take them. But the right to be informed from the respect-for-
persons principle is not absolute and is itself modified by the beneficence principle: Where the risks 
associated with the research are minimal and the costs of fully informing the subject are large, it is 
ethical to not fully inform, and in some cases even deceive, subjects. The costs in this case can be 
monetary or costs to the effectiveness of the research.    
The justice principle explicitly addresses one of the objections to utilitarianism—that it justifies harm to 
some if it creates benefits to others—by saying that those who take the risks should receive the 
benefits. But by applying the principle to groups of people rather than individuals, it is a compromise 
between the two ethical traditions.  
 
Institutional review boards 
As the principles make clear, there are difficult trade-offs to make when determining the most ethical 
way to proceed with research. Researchers have the primary responsibility for judging these trade-offs. 
However, they also have an interest in moving ahead with their research, which may blur their 
perceptions of risks and benefits. An independent authority is therefore needed to assess the trade-offs 
and ensure that ethical rules are applied appropriately. Institutional review boards (IRBs) fulfill this role. 
Most universities in the United States have IRBs with their own processes for reviewing and approving 
research conducted by faculty, staff, and students at the university. Research funding from most 
agencies of the US government requires that researchers follow a set of ethical review guidelines 
established by the Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) and these guidelines have therefore 
become the default standard applied by universities even when a study is not funded by the US 
government. OHRP standards flow from the Belmont Report but are updated regularly.14  
Some US nonuniversity research organizations maintain their own internal IRBs, which follow OHRP 
standards (for example, Innovations for Poverty Action and Abt Associates). Others, such as 
Mathematica Policy Research, use external IRBs accredited by the Association for the Accreditation of 
Human Research Protection Programs (AAHRPP), a voluntary organization.  
Outside the United States, the system of ethical review for social science research that involves human 
subjects is quite mixed. Some countries have systems similar to the US. Australian research guidelines, 
for example, include principles of justice, beneficence, and respect, although they also include a 
“research merit and integrity” principle (which in the US is integrated into the beneficence principle). 
The three main principles underlying Canadian ethics review are respect for persons, concern for 
welfare, and justice.  
A surprising number of universities outside the US have no formal system of ethical review for research 
involving human subjects. Because ethical review boards have mainly been seen as the province of 
                                                            
14 Available at http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/humansubjects/commonrule/index.html. See also 
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/humansubjects/guidance/45cfr46.html#46.101 


medical research, many universities that do not have medical schools do not have ethical research 
review boards. In addition, some medical review boards either do not accept nonmedical research for 
review or are ill-equipped to review nonmedical studies.   
 
Social scientists face three main problems when seeking review from medical review boards: these 
boards are unfamiliar with the type of work social scientists undertake; they have procedures that are 
designed for studies that impose much higher risks on subjects; and they impose medical ethics 
standards, which are not the same as research ethics standards. Lack of familiarity can mean that 
questions are raised about outcome measures that are standard in social science (I was once asked to 
remove a question about what assets a household owned from a survey as it was seen as too intrusive). 
Because medical boards are used to dealing with studies that impose substantial risks on subjects, they 
often have more rigorous safeguards as standard requirements than is normal in low-risk social science 
studies and are unwilling to approve waivers for informed consent or written informed consent, even 
when the risks are low and the burden very high. If a study is examining the impact of a new drug that 
may have dangerous side effects, it is probably appropriate to get written consent from illiterate 
participants by having someone they know carefully read to them the consent form that lists all the risks 
and have them sign. If the study simply measures their height, it may still be regarded as a “health” 
study but gaining oral consent from illiterate participants should be justifiable. Doctors and nurses have 
ethical obligations that go beyond research ethics including providing care to those in need. Thus 
medical ethics boards may require researchers to offer medical care to those they find are in need of 
care as a result of their research. For example, if anthropometric measurements reveal that a child is 
malnourished, a medic may be expected to refer them to care. While medical boards may require 
treatment of subjects that researchers find to be ill, this obligation does not flow from most research 
ethics principles.  
 
Some researchers working on field experiments have responded to the lack of IRBs by working with their 
universities to establish such review boards. The Paris School of Economics and the Institute for 
Financial Management and Research (IFMR) in India worked with J-PAL Europe and J-PAL South Asia, 
respectively, to establish IRBs in 2009. The World Bank, which currently relies on the regulations in its 
member countries, is actively discussing the creation of an ethical review board (Alderman, Das, and Rao 
2014). It is somewhat surprising that the field experiment movement should have spurred the creation 
of IRBs as many of these institutions (including the World Bank) collected data from human subjects 
long before field experiments became popular.15   
 
 
When is ethical review required? 
                                                            
15 One potential spur to the creation of IRBs is the relatively new requirement instituted by the American Economic 
Association that papers involving the collection of data on human subjects must disclose whether they have 
obtained IRB approval. 
 


Researchers have to seek ethical review when they conduct research that involves human subjects. The 
precise definitions of “research” and “involving human subjects” can vary between jurisdictions, so a 
researcher needs to understand the local rules that apply to their research. In some cases multiple 
standards apply (for example, when a researcher at a US university conducts a study in Kenya, they may 
need to seek approval both from their home university and from the Kenyan Medical Research Institute 
(KEMRI).  
In the US, “research” is defined as systematic investigation that leads to the creation of general 
knowledge. Process data about the functioning of a program is not research because it is designed to 
inform the program, but not to generate general knowledge that is useful for other programs. Asking a 
few beneficiaries of a program about their experience is not research because it is not systematic (and 
therefore does not generate general knowledge). This is why most internal evaluations done by 
nongovernmental organizations and governments do not count as research and are not subject to the 
same rigorous ethical review.16   
The practical implication of this definition for researchers is that the early-stage work that researchers 
do to prepare for a field experiment does not usually count as research and thus can be done prior to 
ethical research approval. For example, researchers may visit the program and talk to beneficiaries and 
program staff. They may examine administrative data and pilot questionnaires, all before approval has 
been given. Indeed, much of this work is needed to prepare the paperwork for ethical review, as most 
reviews require a copy of the final questionnaire to be used in any primary data collection. Approval (or 
a waiver stating that full approval is not required) needs to be secured before the collection of any data 
that will be used in the study and that is collected for the purpose of the study. Data that are used in the 
study but are not collected for the purpose of the study (including ongoing administrative data 
collection), can take place before approval has been received because it would have gone ahead with or 
without the study. However, approval may be required for the researcher to access and utilize even 
administrative records because these can include personal information, the release of which could cause 
harm to a research subject.  
The second trigger for ethical review is that the research involves human subjects. (There are other 
guidelines for research on animals, but as social science rarely has animal subjects we ignore these 
regulations here.) Research counts as having human subjects if it includes interviews with human 
subjects, or collects physical specimens from humans (e.g., urine or blood).  
If research involves use of data about humans but does not involve the collection of that data, and the 
researcher never has access to information that would allow them to personally identify them, then 
ethical approval is not required. Nor is approval required if the researcher only uses publically available 
data (which usually has all personal identifying information removed before being made public). Thus a 
study which uses data from a Demographic and Health Survey would not require ethical approval. Much 
like the use of administrative data, if the researcher needs to acquire personal identifiers (such as 
                                                            
16 This is the case even though internal evaluations often collect similar kinds of data to those collected in field 
experiments and the risks associated with inappropriate release of the data is similar. In some countries NGO or 
governmental handling of data from internal evaluations is covered by privacy regulations. 


precise geographic location) in order to undertake their research, then approval is required even if they 
do not collect the data themselves.  
Practical issues in complying with respect-for-human-subjects requirements 
i) 
Informed consent 
The respect-for-persons principle requires that researchers explain any risks of harm associated with 
participating in the study to those involved and gain their consent before proceeding.  
In the case of an experiment randomized at the individual level, complying with this requirement is 
usually relatively straightforward. We select the study sample and then approach the individual, inform 
them of any risks associated with participating in the study, and request their consent to participate. 
Usually this is done before randomization, in the context of collecting baseline data. If the subject does 
not consent they are dropped from the sample, although it is good practice to record the number of 
subjects who decline to participate to give a sense of the representativeness of those who do 
participate.17 The precise wording of the consent and the method by which it is collected has to be 
approved by the IRB and depends on the circumstances of the experiment and the risk involved. In 
general, written consent (i.e., having a subject sign a consent form which sets out the risks and any 
potential benefits) is preferred. However, when many of the subjects are illiterate, a written consent 
form may not be the most effective way to convey risks. It may even cause distress to ask illiterate 
subjects to place their mark on a written document they cannot read. Alderman, Das, and Rao (2013) 
suggest that in India, asking an illiterate person to provide their mark on a paper as part of the interview 
process may give the impression that the survey is run by the government (as thumb prints are often 
associated with official documents) and that therefore participation is mandatory, undermining respect 
for persons. If the risks are high, we may nevertheless need to get written consent by finding a literate 
member of the community and trusted by the participant to carefully explain the written document to 
the participant. For the most part, however, social science experiments do not involve this high level of 
risk and gaining oral consent is often appropriate, especially when a high proportion of subjects are 
illiterate. In this case, the enumerator reads the consent language and asks if the subject provides 
consent, and then checks a box if this consent is given. A key part of consent language is explaining that 
the subject has the right to leave the experiment at any time and has the right not to answer any 
question during the data collection process. It is important that the consent is written in a way that 
subjects readily understand. Zywicki (2007) provides examples in which IRBs have made consent forms 
more technical and harder to understand--which makes it harder for those with limited education to 
make informed decisions about participation.   
Collecting informed consent when randomization is at the community level is more complicated, as data 
are often only collected on a random sample of those in the community and thus the research team may 
not interact directly with all individuals in the community. There are three important issues to keep in 
mind when determining how to proceed in this situation: does the program require participants to opt 
                                                            
17 Information on the number of those approached who declined to participate is a requirement under consortium 
guidelines, and thus usually has to be included in a paper published in a medical journal. 


in? Will data be collected on community-level outcomes, in which case all members of the community 
are under some definitions subjects of the experiment? To what extent is the program itself standard 
practice, and thus those who participate in the program but from whom no data are collected are not 
considered part of the research? 
Many of the programs that are evaluated by field experiments require participants to opt in. For 
example, if a program offers the chance for mothers in a given community to attend literacy classes, 
mothers have a chance to opt in or out of the treatment. As we discuss below, some IRBs would not 
consider those who take part in the program but on whom the researcher does not collect individually 
identifiable data, as being subjects of the experiment. However, even if these program participants are 
considered subjects of the experiment, the program is compliant with the principle of respect for 
persons if someone explains the program to potential participants, who then choose whether or not to 
participate.  
The ethical issues become more complicated if the program provides a service to the entire community 
that participants cannot opt out of (Hutton 2001). Examples include adding chlorine to the community 
well, erecting streetlights, modifying the rules under which the mayor is elected, or changing how 
teachers teach. Usually implementing organizations have ways of seeking community assent before 
proceeding with this type of community-level intervention, and are either governmental bodies 
themselves with their own processes of accountability, or are regulated by government as implementing 
bodies. If the risks of the intervention are low, then individual consent from all community members is 
not usually required: either because the IRB decides the costs of collecting it are too high given the small 
risks, or because they do not consider the program implementation as practice rather than research and 
thus outside their purview. The exception might be if the program design were considered to be driven 
more by research considerations than program considerations (we discuss this issue in the next section).  
In many medical clustered RCTs, informed consent is not collected from individuals because individuals 
are not considered the subjects of the trial, especially if the intervention works at the level of the 
medical practitioner. McRae et al. (2011) argues that patients are not the subjects of trials that provide 
different types of training or incentives to doctors. This is because researchers do not directly interact 
with patients, while medical professionals, who should be considered the subjects of the trial, are 
ethically responsible for deciding what is right for their patients.   
ii) 
Waiving informed consent 
Research ethics rules allow the requirement for informed consent to be waived when the risks to the 
subject are low and the costs of collecting informed consent are high. The costs of collecting informed 
consent could be monetary or come in the form of damaging the integrity of the research. Imagine an 
experiment on the effectiveness of different forms of advertisement in reducing smoking amongst 
adults. The experiment randomizes the position of antismoking billboards across the United States and 
then measures the level of smoking from sales of cigarettes. The participants of the study include 
anyone who sees the billboard. The researcher has no good way of identifying the individuals who see 
the billboard, and data to assess the effectiveness of the intervention comes from administrative 


records on cigarette sales, so they have no opportunity to ask for consent during data collection. Going 
door-to-door in the area to collect consent would be prohibitively expensive and the risks of harm from 
seeing a billboard are low, so the research is likely to receive a waiver for informed consent. Similarly, 
many education field experiments in the US are exempt from collecting consent from all parents of 
students, as it would be infeasible and the risks are low.  
The other cost of collecting informed consent is that knowing they are part of a study, or knowing the 
full details of the study, could change a subject's behavior, which could undermine the validity of an 
experiment. We may not want to tell people, for example, that they are involved in an experiment on 
racial bias as this may make them more aware of potential bias and thus change their behavior during 
the experiment. One approach is to tell the subject they are part of a study, but not give a full 
explanation about what the experiment is about, or even mislead the subject about what the 
experiment is about. Another approach is not to tell subjects they are part of an experiment. If we do 
not tell people they are part of an experiment or mislead them about what the experiment is about, 
permission is required from an IRB before the experiment can go forward. A researcher must justify the 
waiver of informed consent by explaining the likely benefit of the research to society, and why the 
research would be undermined if the subjects knew they were part of an experiment, or knew the real 
reason for the experiment. The IRB will then decide if the lack of full transparency is warranted. IRBs will 
often require researchers to debrief subjects at the end of the experiment as a condition for gaining the 
waiver.  
Note that this is different from deception within the experiment, which is when a research tells a subject 
something that is untrue as part of the experiment. Perhaps the most common form of deception in 
field experiments is when enumerators pretend to be someone they are not: for example, pretend to 
have a specific set of symptoms to see whether the medical professional asks them the appropriate 
questions and responds to the answers with the appropriate care recommendations. One way to 
achieve informed consent in these situations is to warn the provider in advance that there will be 
mystery patients at some point and get their consent for this test. If the experiment runs over many 
months this knowledge that one of many patients will be a mystery patient is unlikely to dramatically 
change their behavior. For more on deception and informed consent, see Alderman, Das, and Rao 
(2013). 
iii) 
Protecting confidentiality of information 
As part of informed consent, the subject is usually told that any information they provide will be kept 
confidential. This agreement with the subject must be strictly adhered to and an IRB application needs 
to set out the practical steps a researcher will take to comply with this agreement. Anyone in the 
research team who is involved in handling data—from the enumerator to the principal investigator—
must be trained on proper data handling to ensure that the protocols described to the IRB are followed. 
Important ways to ensure the maintenance of subject confidentiality are to ensure that any information 
that can link the data back to an individual (i.e., personal identifiers), such as name, address, phone 
number, or photo, is separated from the rest of the data as rapidly as possible; that only de-identified 
data be used, wherever possible, during analysis (to prevent the risk of data leaks); and that data with 


personal identifiers are kept secure. The precise steps will depend on what the data consists of and how 
it was collected. For example, when data are collected through paper surveys, all personal identifiers 
should be put on the first one or two pages of the survey and an ID number (generated only for the 
purposes of the research and thus uninformative to anyone else) should be printed on all pages of the 
survey. This means that as soon as the survey is completed and checked by a supervisor in the field, the 
first pages with identifying information can be separated and stored separately from the rest of the 
survey. The pages with the identifying information and the codes that link that back to the answers to 
the survey must then be stored in a secure place (like a locked cabinet). When data are collected 
electronically, the device can be encrypted so that if the phone, tablet, or PDA is stolen no one can 
access the data. If analysis does require some identifying information (for example, global positioning 
data to examine geographic spillovers), the analysis needs to take place on an encrypted computer so 
that if the computer is stolen the data cannot be accessed. As we discuss below, when identifying 
information, such as global positioning data, is an integral part of the analysis, it can be complicated to 
publish sufficient data to fully replicate the study while still maintaining confidentiality. 
The ethics of implementation 
In the discussion of informed consent, it became apparent that it is not always straightforward to 
identify who is the subject of research and thus from whom informed consent is required. In particular, 
when a field experiment is evaluating a program, are those involved in the program but on whom the 
researcher does not collect data, subjects of the research or not, and do research ethics thus govern the 
program?  The Belmont Report notes that the line between research and practice, and thus the line 
between what requires ethical approval and what does not, is blurred. While most of the report is 
appropriate both for biomedical and behavioral (or social science) research, the section that deals with 
the distinction between research and practice is written almost entirely from a biomedical perspective. 
This has led to some confusion and debate about the ethical standards to be applied to the 
implementation of programs that goes alongside many social science field experiments. Indeed, the 
Belmont Report explicitly states in footnote 3, at the end of the section defining the separation of 
research and practice, that the authors do not feel equipped to define the boundary between research 
and practice in social science:    
“Because the problems related to social experimentation may differ substantially from 
those of biomedical and behavioral research, the Commission specifically declines to 
make any policy determination regarding such research at this time. Rather, the 
Commission believes that the problem ought to be addressed by one of its successor 
bodies.” 
Subsequently, a group was established to work on this, but no additional guidelines were released. The 
practical question that faces researchers and IRBs evaluating research proposals from social scientists is 
if and when ethical approval should be sought, and research rules (including requirements for informed 
consent) applied to the program that is being evaluated. The discussion below represents my view 
based on a close reading of the Belmont Report and requesting ethical review for many RCTs. However, 
it is worth reiterating that different IRBs in the US interpret the standards differently; different countries 


have different rules; and the regulation of implementation is one of the areas where standards differ 
most sharply across institutions.  
At one end of the spectrum the answer seems obvious: in the canonical case of a medical field 
experiment testing a new drug, the risks associated with the drug (the intervention) need to be assessed 
against the benefits of learning about its effectiveness. In other words, the assessment of risks and 
benefits and the informed consent apply to the program being tested (the drug) as well as the data 
collection that surrounds it.  
Yet there are also examples where it is equally obvious that ethical regulations have no jurisdiction over 
the intervention a researcher is evaluating. Angrist (1990) evaluates the impact of the Vietnam War, 
which involved a lottery to determine participation. Chattopadhyay and Duflo (2004) similarly evaluated 
the impact of a ruling by the Indian Supreme Court that the position of village leader (pradhan) had to 
be given to a woman in a third of cases (allocated randomly in many Indian states). In these cases IRBs 
had no jurisdiction over the implementation of the program being evaluated: there was no question of 
insisting that those whose names were entered into the Vietnam lottery had to provide informed 
consent. Nor could villages decline to participate in the quota program for women’s political 
participation.  
What is the key distinction between the evaluation of a new drug and the evaluation of the Vietnam 
War/quotas cases that explains why implementation is part of research for the first, but not the other 
cases? One difference is that the drug (the intervention) was designed by the researcher, whereas in the 
second cases the intervention was designed and implemented by someone else (e.g., the government or 
the Supreme Court). I do not think this is the key distinction for two reasons. First, we think the review 
of the drug trial should include the risks and benefits of the drug whether or not the researcher who 
developed the drug goes on to test it, or if someone else runs the clinical trial. Second, if the identity of 
the implementer determines whether the intervention should be reviewed, then we would say that if a 
researcher also helped run a nongovernmental organization, then everything that NGO did, whether or 
not it was evaluated, should be subject to ethical approval.  
The Belmont Report also supports the idea that whether or not an activity falls under research 
guidelines should be based on what the activity is, not on who undertakes it. The report acknowledges 
that (for biomedical research) researchers will often practice medicine (just as social science researchers 
sometimes practice direct poverty-alleviation work or advise governments or NGOs on the design of 
policy).  This “practice” is deemed to fall outside the purview of research ethics.  Instead, the Belmont 
Report defines research as an activity that leads to generalizable knowledge.  
The challenge in applying this rule in the case of field experiments is that it is a combination of two 
different activities that lead to generalizable knowledge. Most field experiments combine the rollout of 
a program with data collection, and neither on their own would create generalizable knowledge.   
But this gives a useful criterion for deriving whether and what part of implementation falls under 
research ethics guidelines: namely any change in program implementation from normal practice (or 
what would have happened otherwise) that is brought about in order to create generalized knowledge. 


Thus if a program was to be rolled out by an NGO in a new area, this would not create generalized 
knowledge and would not (in my view) count as research, and the program itself should be governed by 
the regulation of NGO activity rather than a research ethics board. The use and collection of data by 
researchers studying the rollout does fall under research ethics, as it is necessary to draw general 
lessons from the rollout. However, if in order to learn from the program the rollout was changed in a 
substantive way, then this change is covered by research ethics. Note that this is not the position that all 
IRBs take. KEMRI required that parents of all children who were part of a school-based deworming 
program in Kenya run by International Child Support provide written permission before receiving the 
drug because the program was being studied. If the program was not being evaluated, the NGO would 
not have had to collect written (or even oral) consent as deworming drugs have been shown to be 
extremely safe. In other words, exactly the same action by the same organization was considered 
research when the action was being studied, but was not considered research when not studied. Zywicki 
(2007) discusses an example where a study that included provision of a potentially life-saving 
medication was shut down because researchers were unable to get signed consent in advance--even 
though in the absence of a study, written consent would probably not have been required to provide 
the medication.  
It is sometimes assumed that if a researcher implements a program, then the entire program is part of 
the change that is introduced in order to generate knowledge. But as I have argued above, ethics 
guidelines are not based on who does the activity, but what the activity is. Thus if a researcher 
evaluated an NGO program that hands out bed-nets at a school and the researcher interviews a random 
subset of children at the school, then the researcher would only have to get informed consent from the 
individuals that they interview. If the researcher organization is the one to hand out the bed-nets, I 
would argue the same rules apply: research rules cover the interviews and data collection, but informed 
consent is not required to hand out the bed-nets themselves. 
Questions around researcher implementation were vividly illustrated in a controversy surrounding an 
election experiment conducted in Montana (Johnson 2015). In the experiment, researchers sent voters 
flyers that put individual judges up for election on an ideological scale. Key complaints about the project 
were that a) the flyers used the State of Montana seal, giving the impression that the document was an 
official state document when it was not; b) the flyers were “express advocacy,” i.e., they advocated for 
individual candidates rather than issues and thus fell under reporting rules which were not followed; c) 
IRB approval for the study as it was carried out was not sought or received; and d) the intervention may 
have changed the results of some elections. The first two are violations under Montana election law 
according to the report of the Commissioner of Political Practices of the State of Montana (2015) and 
are being dealt with as such. In other words, the researchers are being regulated as implementers and 
being held to those standards. This fact adds one twist: due to universities' tax status, even if the 
researchers had followed disclosure rules for express advocacy, any money that ran through the 
university could not be used for advocacy.  
There is more debate about whether changing the outcome of election is a violation of ethics. 
Presumably the objection applies only if researchers run the intervention, because researchers study 
interventions that influence elections all the time. If the view is that interventions run by researchers 


should not change elections, this raises the question of whether interventions run by researchers should 
not change other outcomes? It would be odd to say that we do not want field experiments in medicine 
to change peoples’ health outcomes, for example.  
One argument to suggest that elections are different from other interventions is that while improving 
one person’s health does not influence another person’s health, election outcomes are a zero sum gain; 
an intervention cannot contribute to an overall improvement in society and instead must inevitably help 
one group at the expense of another. But many of the interventions that researchers study have some 
distributional or zero sum aspects. Is it unethical for a researcher to run a study that helps some women 
establish small businesses, which could have a potential negative externality on existing local 
businesses?  The truth is that social science is involved in the real world and the interventions that social 
scientists study will have impacts in that world. One practical call for change that has come out of the 
Montana case is that IRBs may be too focused on potential harm to the narrow subjects of the 
experiment and should be more aware of costs to society as a whole, as well as benefits to society as a 
whole (Humphries 2014 and Johnson 2015). As we conduct studies we must be aware both of research 
ethics and the ethics and regulations surrounding the interventions we study. But it is unclear why 
researchers should, when acting as implementers, have a different set of ethics standards or regulations 
from other implementers. 
One benefit of deciding what should be covered by research ethics based on the activity and not on who 
undertakes the activity is that it avoids drawing a bright line about when a program is researcher-
implemented and when it is not. Given the close partnership between researchers and implementers in 
field experiments, most programs that are evaluated are a combination of the two. Even when someone 
who is not a researcher implements a program, the researcher often provides advice (based on their 
knowledge about what has worked elsewhere) about the program design. But advice about how to 
improve a program is not research. What counts as research is deliberately manipulating the program to 
produce general lessons: for example, to create a control group so that the program can be evaluated 
rigorously. In the next section we discuss examples of where there might be potential risks or costs 
associated with the changes in implementation brought about by the manipulation of a program 
necessary to rigorously evaluate it.  
Potential harm from different forms of randomization 
There are many different ways of introducing an element of randomization into a program to enable 
rigorous evaluation of its impact. Each approach raises its own unique ethical issues. 
The research manipulation that nonresearchers often feel most uncomfortable with is the treatment 
lottery. In this design, some study participants are randomized to have access to the program and some 
never receive the program. The concern is that some potential participants in a program are “denied” 
access to the program in order to evaluate its impact. When assessing potential harm from a field 
experiment we need to consider whether the introduction of a treatment lottery changed the total 
number of people who receive the program or whether it changed who received the program. In most 
cases, the treatment lottery approach is used when there are insufficient funds to provide the policy or 


program to all those who could benefit from it. For example, a program provides financial literacy 
training to small scale entrepreneurs in Bolivia but only has funding to cover two hundred 
entrepreneurs, far fewer than the number of all eligible entrepreneurs. A lottery is used to decide who 
receives access to the program but does not change the number of people treated.  
There may be cases where a program (often a government program) does have sufficient funds to 
provide the treatment to all those who are eligible, but a decision is made to reduce the number of 
people who receive the program in the first phase in order to evaluate it. In this case, the risk of harm is 
that the program is beneficial and delaying its introduction to all of the eligible delays benefits to those 
potential participants. Note that this is a risk of harm, not a known harm, because at this stage we do 
not know that the program will be beneficial. (If we did know it was beneficial and there was funding for 
everyone to receive it, we should not be doing the experiment.) This risk of harm needs to be offset 
against the potential benefits of understanding the impact of the program, including the possibility that 
we find the program has unanticipated negative effects and that evaluating it saves people from these 
harms. 
If a treatment lottery does not change the number of participants in a program, it might change who 
participates in a program. Ravalion (2012) suggests that allocating benefits randomly treats research 
subjects “merely as means to some end,” and thus violates the respect-for-persons principle. But all 
research with human subjects uses information from some individuals as a mean to the end of drawing 
general lessons. Especially if the risk of harm is small (for example, the time cost of filling in a survey), 
and even when they are large (as in some medical trials), many people are happy to contribute if they 
feel there are benefits from the research to society.18 The respect-for-persons principle recognizes that 
people can make informed choices about whether to participate in a study that may mainly help others.   
A subtler objection is that random allocation of resources is a form of mistargeting (Barrett and Carter 
2014). Imagine that a program has funds to provide warm clothing to 500 poor families in a city in the 
northeastern US, and the implementers have a good way to identify those most in need. Evaluating this 
program would require identifying 1,000 needy families, some of who might not be as needy as the 
original 500 if the program had really identified the 500 neediest families in the city. From the 1,000, 
half would be randomly chosen to receive the warm clothing. In this case, the evaluation imposes some 
risk of harm because some of those identified as the 500 most needy will end up not receiving the warm 
clothes, while some who are slightly less needy will receive them. Note, however, that it is only a risk of 
harm because we don’t know if receiving the warm clothes is a benefit (if we did we would not be 
evaluating the program) and we usually don’t know whether the way that the program identifies the 
neediest is effective. Recent field experiments that specifically look at the question of targeting (by 
randomizing different approaches to targeting in different communities) suggest that conventionally-
used targeting approaches may not necessarily the best way to identify need (Alatas, Banerjee, Hanna, 
Olken, and Tobias 2012).  Many programs do not do a comprehensive assessment of who are the 
neediest in a given target area. Instead they have eligibility criteria and stop recruiting to their program 
                                                            
18 As we discuss under the respect-for-person principle, there is often a challenge of getting informed consent in 
clustered trials. 


when it is full. In these cases, it is possible to work with implementers to continue the recruitment 
process until a larger number of eligible participants have been identified and then randomized amongst 
them. As the most vulnerable are often not the first to sign up to a new program, this extended 
recruitment period can actually help improve targeting.   
 
When designing a field experiment it is usually possible to avoid weakening the targeting criteria of the 
program by expanding the geographic scope of the program. In the example above, instead of 
expanding the potential pool of families to 1,000 in the same city, it might be possible to expand the 
program to a second city, identify the 500 neediest families in each, and then randomly pick 250 from 
each to receive the program. This would allow the evaluation to go ahead without weakening the 
targeting. This geographic expansion to accommodate an evaluation does usually increase the logistical 
costs of the program implementers, and this cost needs to be set against the benefit of doing the 
evaluation. 
 
If none of these options are workable and there is a high risk that the evaluation will lead to poorer 
targeting of the program, this would not necessarily make the evaluation unethical, because this risk 
needs to be compared to the benefits associated with the study. 
 
One form of field experiment where the issue of mistargeting is particularly relevant is the treatment 
lottery around a cutoff. Unlike a simple treatment lottery, this methodology explicitly recognizes that 
some potential participants may be more qualified than others and is used when programs have explicit 
criteria for ranking eligibility. Potential participants who are near the cutoff for eligibility are randomized 
into or out of the program. There are three slightly different ways to do a lottery around a cutoff. 
Eligibility can be expanded to those who would previously have been ineligible, and access to the 
program within this group can be randomized. Or the group that is to be randomized can come out of 
those who would previously have been just above and just below the eligibility cutoff. Or the 
randomization can occur only amongst those who would previously have been eligible, thus reducing 
the total access to the program. Usually the methodology does not change the number of beneficiaries, 
but in most cases it involves accepting some people into the program who are less qualified than some 
others who are not accepted.  
 
In assessing the trade-off between costs and benefits of using a lottery around the cutoff, there are a 
number of issues to keep in mind. As we have said, it is unlikely that the program is known to be 
beneficial, or else the evaluation would not be occurring. There are degrees of uncertainty: the stronger 
the evidence that the program is beneficial, the greater the concern about “denying” people access. 
Another key question is whether the benefits of the program are likely to be higher for those that 
appear to be more qualified.  
 
For example, imagine the methodology is being used to evaluate the effect of giving access to consumer 
loans to people in South Africa (Karlan and Zinman 2010). The bank has a scoring system for deciding 
who is creditworthy. The assumption is that those who score highly will use the loan wisely and will be 
able to repay the bank, making both the bank and the participants better off. The scoring system is also 


meant to weed out those who would be a bad risk and will not be able to repay. Potentially bad risks do 
worse if they are given a loan and cannot repay it because they acquire a bad credit record (although if 
they would never otherwise have been eligible for a loan from any lender it is not clear a poor credit 
record hurts them).  It was precisely this concern on the part of the Bank about the quality of their 
targeting approach that led them to invite the researchers to study the cutoff and help them improve it.  
 
But do the researchers, or the bank, know that the scoring system is good at determining who is a good 
risk and who is a bad risk? Maybe the system is good enough to detect the very good and the very bad 
risks, but does it do a good job of selecting people around the cutoff? It is also possible that the credit 
scoring system may be discriminating against people who are good risks but happen to live in a poorer 
neighborhood. In this case, using a lottery may actually reduce the harm of discrimination. If there is 
uncertainty about the quality of the scoring system, a lottery around the cutoff can be a very good 
reason to do a randomized evaluation, because it helps generate knowledge about how good the 
scoring system is and whether the cutoff has been placed at the right point. It was precisely this 
uncertainty about the appropriate scoring system and cut off that led the South African bank in Karlan 
and Zinman (2010) to ask the researchers to undertake the research. 
 
In the bank example, if the evaluation finds that those just below the cutoff do just as well as those 
above it, then the bank will be encouraged to extend its loans to more people, and those just below the 
cutoff will gain, as will the bank. There is a risk that the cutoff was at the right place and that those 
below the cutoff will get into debt as a result of being offered a loan they cannot repay. This risk has to 
be taken into account when designing the study. The risk can be ameliorated by only randomizing above 
the cutoff (lottery amongst the qualified) but this has other risks: the evaluation cannot tell if the cutoff 
was too high, and it reduces access amongst the qualified more than in other designs. It is also possible 
to narrow the range around the cutoff within which the randomization takes place so that the bank 
never lends to anyone who has a very bad score. But this also has downsides: less would be learned 
about where the cutoff should be and, for a given size program, there would be less statistical power 
and thus less precision in the impact estimate.  
 
The better the evidence there is that the cutoff is well measured and targets the program well, the more 
careful researchers should be with a lottery around the cutoff. For example, there is a strong evidence 
base suggesting that weight-for-age and arm circumference are good criteria for judging which children 
need a supplemental feeding program.  Researchers may therefore decide that randomizing around the 
cutoff for a supplemental feeding program is not appropriate.  
 
 
D. Transparency of research19 
                                                            
19 In preparing this section I learned a lot from the lecture notes of Edward Miguel’s semester long course on 
transparency of research (http://emiguel.econ.berkeley.edu/teaching/12), although I do not always come to the 
same conclusions.  


Organized skepticism is essential to the process of scientific inquiry: “Involving as it does the verifiability 
of results, scientific research is under the exacting scrutiny of fellow experts. … The activities of scientists 
are subject to rigorous policing, to a degree perhaps unparalleled in any other field of activity” (Merton 
1942, p.276, as quoted in Miguel 2015).  
 
In the last few years there has been growing concern that research in the social and medical sciences 
does not always live up to this ideal. In 2011 an investigation of the work of Diederik Stapel revealed at 
least thirty papers in peer review psychology journals were based on made-up data (reported in 
Callaway 2011). Science retracted a highly publicized field experiment on attitudes to gay marriage 
when concerns were raised about the authenticity of the data (McNutt 2015). Medical trials funded 
entirely by for-profit sources are more likely to find positive results from new treatment compared to 
existing care than studies funded by nonprofit sources (Ridker and Torres 2006). The reproducibility 
project asked researchers to run new experiments to attempt to replicate the results from studies 
published in top psychology journals in 2008. Of a hundred original studies, only 35 had statistically 
significant effects in the replication in the same direction as in the original study and the effect sizes in 
the replication studies had statistically significantly smaller effect sizes (Open Science Collaboration 
2015).  
Nor has economics escaped the spotlight. Brodeur et al. (forthcoming) examines studies from top 
economic journals published between 2005–2011 and finds a bunching of results with a p-value just 
below 0.05, the traditional standard for statistical significance. In this volume Fryer 2016 (Chapter xx) 
shows a relationship between the magnitude of estimated effect sizes and sample size in published 
papers of field experiments in education (a telltale mark of publication bias, discussed below). Chang 
and Li (2015) in their examination of macroeconomic papers are only able to “successfully replicate the 
qualitative findings from 22 of 67 (33%) papers without contacting authors. Excluding the 6 papers with 
confidential data and 2 papers that use software we do not possess we replicate 29 of 59 papers (49%) 
with assistance from the authors.”  
Finally, there have been high-profile arguments about whether there were mistakes in data or analysis 
and the extent to which the conclusion of several important economics studies should be revised 
including (in chronological order), Hoxby 2000 (comment Rothstein 2005; and response Hoxby 2007); 
Donohue and Levitt 2001 (comments Foote and Goetz 2005; and response Donohue and Levitt 2006); 
Reinhart and Rogoff 2010 (comment Hurndon, Ash, and Pollin 2013; and response Rogoff 2013);  and 
Miguel and Kremer 2004 (comment Davey et al. 2015; and response Hicks, Kremer, and Miguel 2015).  
It is worth distinguishing between different concerns. Research results may not be reflective of the 
underlying true state of the world because: 
i) 
data are made up; 
ii) 
there was a mistake in the data collection or data analysis; 
iii) 
results are not robust to alternative specifications; 
iv) 
the findings hold only in a very specific context and are not general; 


v) 
the intervention is not described in enough detail to make it possible to test whether the 
results hold in a similar context; or 
vi) 
sampling variation means the results were due to chance.  
One way to address i) through iii) is to make the data behind a study publically available. Other 
researchers can then check the data for signs that it was made up or manipulated (e.g., Broockman and 
Kalla 2014, whose analysis led to the Science retraction mentioned above). They can also check that 
simple mistakes in analysis were not made and that the result is robust to different specifications. 
Problem iv) requires findings to be tested in different contexts, while v) requires details of 
implementation to be included in supplemental material, as journals usually require that this detail is 
not included in the main paper. Problem iv) can be reduced by adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing 
and preanalysis plans (discussed in detail below) and by testing the same intervention more than once. 
However, none of these approaches designed to increase reliability are costless or unproblematic.  
In parallel with the concerns about the reliability of original studies, there is also concern about the 
reliability of attempts to reproduce findings. In commenting on the International Initiative for Impact 
Evaluation’s effort to check the replicability of key international development papers, Ozler says, “the 
point of robustness checks in such a replication exercise is not to rerun regressions until you convert one 
statistically significant result to insignificant and highlight that. … A big part of the point of replication is 
to reduce p-hacking, not to proliferate it.” (Ozler 2015). Commenting on the discussion of the reanalysis 
of Miguel and Kremer 2004, Blattman in his blog, “Dear Journalists and Policymakers: What you need to 
know about the Worm Wars,” concluded, “Whether it’s a sensational photo, a sensational result, or a 
sensational take down of a seminal paper, everyone has incentives to exaggerate. This whole episode 
strikes me as a sorry day for science.” Simonsohn (2015) points out that many studies that claim to find 
a “failure to replicate” have a smaller sample size than the original study and are not sufficiently well-
powered to test whether the original study replicates. Again, there are several different concerns: 
i) 
researchers attempting to test the reliability of an original paper either by reanalyzing 
the data or running a new study may have incentives to find a result that contradicts the 
original study; 
ii) 
small errors in data or analysis do not always translate into a substantial change in the 
overall conclusions and it is important to distinguish between meaningful and 
insubstantial changes in results;  
iii) 
if a large number of different specifications are tried in an attempt to test the 
“robustness” of a result, selective presentation of a few of these specifications may give 
a misleading impression of how robust the results are; 
iv) 
authors may pursue publication only when they find a study does not replicate, giving a 
misleading impression of the overall reliability of a broad body of research;  
v) 
sample variation may mean the result of a follow-up study is due to chance; and 
vi) 
the statistics involved in replication or reproducibility is not straightforward and there is 
no single agreed standard to judge whether a reanalysis or replication “fails to replicate” 
the original study. 


Confusing the discussion even further is nonstandard use of terminology. Sometimes the term 
“replication” is used to mean taking the original data and seeing if the same data generates the tables in 
the published paper.  Sometimes the term is used to mean testing whether the same result is found 
when the experiment is run on a different sample of the same underlying population. Finally, it could 
mean testing in a new population. Clemens (2015) provides a useful classification of the different 
possible options and suggests a standardization of terms. Note that while I try and use Clemens’ 
definitions as much as possible in this chapter, when talking about papers that use differently definitions 
I use the term as used by the author of the paper (especially when quoting papers). 
 
Figure 1 
The statistics of data mining, multiple hypothesis testing and publication bias       
Before discussing approaches that can be used to address some of the challenges addressed above, it is 
important to be precise about these challenges and the statistics behind them. With the exception of 
making up data, which is simple fraud, the challenges arise from the fact that standard statistical tests of 
the significance of the estimated coefficients in a randomized evaluation are based on the assumption 
that we are testing an independent hypothesis once. In reality, researchers often use one study to test 
more than one related hypothesis, and one study may not be the only study to test that hypothesis. 
With full information it is possible to adjust the standard statistical tests to account for the fact that 
Table 1: A PROPOSED DEFINITION TO DISTINGUISH REPLICATION AND ROBUSTNESS TESTS
Methods in follow-up study
versus methods reported in original:
Sampling
distribution
for parameter
estimates
Sufﬁcient
conditions for
discrepancy
Types
Same
speciﬁcation
Same
population
Same
sample
Examples
Replication
Same
Random
chance, error,
or fraud
8
<
:
Veriﬁcation
Reproduction
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Fix faulty measure-
ment, code, dataset
Remedy sampling
error, low power
Robustness
Different
Sampling
distribution
has changed
8
<
:
Reanalysis
Extension
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes/No
No
Alter speciﬁcation,
recode variables
Alter place or
time; drop outliers
The “same” speciﬁcation, population, or sample means the same as reported in the original paper, not necessarily what was contained in the code and data used by the original paper.
Thus for example if code used in the original paper contains an error such that it does not run exactly the regressions that the original paper said it does, new code that ﬁxes the error
is nevertheless using the “same” speciﬁcations (as described in the paper).
2


multiple different hypotheses have been tested within a study, or that one hypothesis has been tested 
multiple times across different studies.  
Most RCTs report both the estimated coefficient on the treatment dummy and the p-value associated 
with this coefficient. The p-value gives the probability that the estimated coefficient came about by 
chance. The uncertainty in the estimated coefficient is driven by sampling variation. We randomly 
sample our treatment and comparison groups from a wider population and we may by chance choose 
people to include in the treatment group who experience a positive (or negative) shock unrelated to the 
program we are evaluating. This would lead us to overestimate (or underestimate) the true program 
effect. If we ran a very large number of RCTs, the average estimated treatment effect would be close to 
the true treatment effect. An estimated treatment effect from any one trial is one random draw from a 
distribution of possible treatment effects, centered around the true effect. The probability that any 
nonzero treatment effect we observe in one particular experiment is due to chance depends on the 
estimated effect, the sample size, and the variance in the underlying population from which we draw 
our sample (which we approximate using the sample's variance). The standard calculation for the p-
value of an estimated treatment effect assumes that we have made one random draw from the 
distribution of possible combinations of treatment and comparison groups. If we make more than one 
draw, we need to be transparent about this and to account for it. (See Chapter XX for more discussion 
on the econometrics behind randomized trials.)       
There are two main ways in which our research may deviate from the simple one-arm, one-study 
assumption behind standard hypothesis testing: a single hypothesis may be tested more than once with 
several different studies, or multiple different and interrelated hypotheses may be tested in the same 
study. When we know exactly which hypotheses have been tested by which researchers, it is possible to 
draw valid conclusions, including by adjusting the calculation of p-values. However, lack of research 
transparency can lead other researchers to misinterpret the implications of a single study or 
combination of studies.  
Publication bias 
If several RCTs are run on the same population, we are taking multiple draws from the distribution of 
possible RCTs and this will increase the precision of our estimate of the true effect size. We will have 
greater confidence in the weighted average-effect size of all the different studies than in the estimated 
effect size from one study on its own (where studies with larger sample sizes are given greater weight).20  
However, if we see only a select sample of the RCTs conducted, we may not draw a correct inference 
about the true effect size. If we see only those realizations that fall in a particular part of the distribution 
                                                            
20 Economists rarely do a formal meta-analysis where coefficients are averaged in this way because we rarely see 
multiple RCTs of precisely the same intervention on the same population. As Meager (2015) reports, averaging 
coefficients is not an efficient way to use the data from many studies. Meta-analyses are more common in health, 
and studies of the same intervention on different populations are averaged based on an assumption that the 
treatment effect (and underlying population variance) is the same in the different populations. Instead, 
economists tend to review the studies and discuss how and why treatment effects might or might not vary 
between populations. Publication bias is as damaging to a meta-analysis as it is to a review of the literature.  


of possible estimated-effect sizes, our overall estimated-effect size will be biased. This selection in the 
effect sizes we observe can result from researchers seeking to publish only those RCTs that have 
estimated-effect sizes that fall in a certain range, or if journals only publish those estimated effects that 
fall in a given range of effect sizes. To illustrate, we take an example where all studies have the same 
sample size N (and thus should be accorded the same weight) and are done on the same underlying 
population (and thus are all draws from the same distribution and have the same variance which we 
assume to be known).  Figure 2.a shows the case where the true effect size is zero, and therefore the 
distribution of possible estimated-effect sizes from RCTs with sample size N is centered around zero. 
Standard hypothesis testing would give us a critical value ±𝛽𝑐𝑣 (i.e., if the estimated effect size is 
larger/smaller than +/-𝛽𝑐𝑣, there is less than a 5 percent probability that the effect size was the result of 
chance if the true effect was zero). Imagine three different RCTs were run and they provide estimated-
effect sizes 𝛽1, 𝛽2, and 𝛽3. If we observe all three estimates, we have a new estimated-effect size based 
on all three studies that has a tighter confidence band than any of the studies on their own. As this 
confidence band nevertheless includes zero, we correctly fail to reject the null hypothesis that the true 
effect is zero, and indeed we have reasonable confidence that the true effect is close to zero given our 
tight confidence band. 
 
Figure 2: distribution of likely effect sizes with a) sample size N b) taking into account results from 3 
randomized studies, and c) taking into account results only from studies 2 and 3. 
However, if those doing or funding the studies have an interest in a certain outcome and repress the 
results of those studies that do not have a positive coefficient (in this case 𝛽2) we may reject the null 
hypothesis, i.e., conclude that the true effect is different from zero with greater than 95 percent 
probability. Note that our new estimate of the true effect may be within our original confidence band 
around zero, but not within our new confidence band, which is smaller given that we are drawing on 
two studies. Both our estimate of the true effect size and our new confidence band will be biased 
because of the deliberate exclusion of studies whose estimated effect sizes fall outside a given range. 
This is one form of publication bias, also known as the “file drawer problem” (Rosenthal 1979).  
Publication bias can also arise if researchers and publishers have no reason to prefer positive or negative 
results but are more likely to publish results that are significantly different from zero. In the illustration 
above, only 𝛽3 is, on its own, significantly different from zero. If only this study is published we might 
erroneously reject the null hypothesis and conclude the true effect is less than zero. Note that with a 
large enough set of studies, we will eventually correctly conclude that the estimated effect is 
indistinguishable from zero even if only studies with results significantly different from zero are 


published. This is because some studies will be published that have significant positive effects and some 
will be published with significantly negative effects, and eventually it will be possible to conclude that 
the correct effect is indistinguishable from zero. However, this process will take much longer than if all 
studies were published.21 
Publication bias can be avoided if we know the full population of studies that have been undertaken and 
know the results of each. This could be achieved by a two-step process in which researchers i) record 
the existence of a study and the hypothesis it intends to test before the researcher (or journal) knows 
the results; and ii) the researcher commits to reporting the results (preferably in the same place) even if 
the paper never gets accepted in a journal. A researcher doing a literature review could then observe 
the results of all the RCTs examining a given hypotheses. The second step is harder to police, especially 
as some journals will not publish a study if the results have been reported elsewhere. Thus a researcher 
may spend years attempting to get a study with a zero treatment effect published and not be able to 
release the results during that process. Fortunately, even step one moves us closer to the goal of 
reducing publication bias by allowing a researcher undertaking a literature review to observe how many 
of the studies that sort to test a given hypothesis have had their results published relatively soon after 
the predicted end of the study. If they observe that all the published studies have positive estimated 
treatment effects, but that only a small proportion of those that were due to have been completed at 
the time of the review have been completed, this would cast some doubt on the reliability of the 
estimated effect of the published studies.  
Current moves to address publication bias 
A system of approved registries in which researchers record RCTs that involve health outcomes has been 
in place for many years: commonly used registries include ClinicalTrials.gov and the EU Clinical Trials 
Register. An international system for uniquely numbering trials, the International Standard Randomized 
Clinical Trial Number (ISRCTN), attempts to make it easier to track the number of unique clinical trials on 
a given topic: trials may have different names and be registered in different places, but they can only 
have one unique ISRCTN. 
The American Economic Association (AEA) recently established a registry for randomized trials in the 
social sciences (socialscienceregistry.org). The International Initiative for Impact Evaluations (3ie) also 
has a Registry for International Development Impact Evaluations (RIDIE), which accepts evaluations that 
are not randomized, but does not accept evaluations of programs in advanced economies. The objective 
of these registries is to make it easier to track how many studies have attempted to test a given 
hypothesis in the social sciences. Unlike health journals, social science journals do not (yet) require 
authors to register their field experiments in an approved registry in order to be published. However, 
                                                            
21 Simply having a longer gap between RCT completion and publication for studies that have results that are, on 
their own, not significantly different from zero at the traditional confidence levels is sufficient to cause some bias. 
If there is a stream of RCTs being conducted and a shorter gap between completion and publication for studies 
that have estimated effects within a given range than for those with estimated effects outside this range, then at 
any given time a review of published studies will observe a biased set of results and draw inaccurate conclusions. 


the AEA and other professional bodies strongly encourage their members to register their trials and a 
number of funders are now requiring their grantees to do so. 
Registering a field experiment is relatively straightforward. The required fields in the AEA registry 
include title; country; status; trial start and end date; intervention start and end date; a brief description 
of the experimental design (i.e., the hypothesis to be tested); the main outcomes to be measured; 
keywords (to allow those doing a literature review to search for all studies that examine a given issue); 
whether the RCT is clustered, and if so, the number of clusters; the number of planned observations; 
and whether and from whom human subjects approval was obtained. All of these pieces of information 
are usually required to obtain human subjects approval to proceed with a field experiment, so the 
additional burden on researchers of registering is minimal. The registry allows researchers to report the 
final results on the registry or link to a final paper so that those doing a review can tell whether the 
results of the study were ever released and what they were. 
There is no requirement to provide details on how the data will be analyzed (although it is possible to 
use the AEA registry to register such a plan, as discussed in the next section). Nor does registering a 
study mean the authors have to publicly release their data, although the AEA registry does allow for 
links to published data and the final paper. While it is possible to change information in the AEA registry 
once a trial has been registered (for example, changing the end date because of delays in program 
implementation), these changes are tracked so that it is possible to see the evolution of the trial over 
time. For example, if the sample size is changed, this can be tracked.  
If registration is to help mitigate publication bias, it should be completed before the results are known. 
The AEA labels studies as being “preregistered” if the registration is completed before the intervention 
starts.  
There are relatively few downsides to registration as a way to reduce publication bias. The cost is mainly 
the time taken to fill out the registration. The main risk is that a registration system may not be useful 
because it is not complete. While registries for medical studies have operated for a longer time than 
those in social science and medical journals provide strong incentives for registration, a very large 
number of studies in these registries never disclose results, even in the registry.  
Data mining and correcting for multiple hypothesis testing 
When two different studies test the same hypothesis, it is clear that these represent two draws from the 
set of possible results, but even within a single study it is possible to effectively take more than one 
draw.  
Imagine we are running a field experiment to test the effectiveness of different health messages in 
encouraging people to purchase soap. Every day we stand at a grocery store and recruit shoppers into 
the study. Some are randomized to receive one message and others to receive another message, and we 
observe their purchases as they check out. Each evening we go home and analyze the data from our 
field experiment. At the end of the first and second day there is no significant difference in purchasing 
decisions between those randomized to receive different messages. After the end of the third day we 


see a significant difference and decide we have reached a big enough sample size to show a significant 
difference and thus stop the experiment and publish the result. While all three days were part of the 
same experiment, we are falling into exactly the same trap as described in the publication bias section 
above. We randomly chose three different samples to run our experiment: day 1 data, day 1 and 2 data, 
and day 1, 2, and 3 data; we decided to show the results of only one of these—three--because it 
produced a result we wanted to see. It is quite possible that this result came from chance variation in 
who was randomized into which group on day 3. If we had continued the experiment for another day, 
the difference between the two groups might have gone away again. The solution to this “stopping 
problem” is relatively simple: we need to define our sample size in advance, based on power 
calculations, and stop when we reach our predetermined sample size. To be able to credibly show to 
others that we followed this procedure it is useful to commit publicly, in advance, to the sample size at 
which we intend to stop the experiment. The AEA registry is one place where such commitments can be 
archived. It preserves a record of the date on which the commitment was made and of any changes 
made to the commitment over time, with relevant dates.   
The decision about when to stop a rolling-enrollment field experiment is only one of many potential 
choices that a researcher makes about how to collect and analyze data. Many of these choices are, in 
the case of field experiments, made before the researcher knows what implication these choices will 
have on the final outcome of the analysis. For example, we make the decision about where to do the 
study, what type of participants to survey, the sample size, what variables to collect, the time frame 
over which we expect the impact to become apparent, and how to phrase the questions. Critically, who 
falls into the treatment and who into the control group is not decided by the researcher.  
Decisions over which a researcher has discretion during the analysis stage include whether or not to 
control for independent variables in the estimating regression; whether to drop “outliers” from the 
analysis sample and which observations count as outliers; which of potentially many outcome variables 
to consider the most important; whether to define the outcome measure in levels, logs, or changes; 
whether and how to combine different outcome measures into an aggregate outcome measure; and 
within which subgroups to test for heterogeneous treatment effects. The risk that different choices on 
these issues can lead to different conclusions has been accepted for some time (Leamer 1983). 
However, it is important not to overstate this risk, which will vary depending on the situation. With a 
large enough sample size, controlling for independent variables may somewhat increase the precision of 
the estimated effect, but choosing different variables to add as controls rarely changes the estimated 
coefficient much. In most cases, results are not sensitive to whether or not outliers are dropped, and 
reviewers usually request authors to show that results are robust to including or excluding outliers and 
controls. In some cases there is also not much discretion about what the main outcome variable should 
be. A program designed to increase school enrollment will have school enrollment as the main outcome; 
one designed to improve vaccination rates will likely use percent of children fully vaccinated. While 
there may be slightly different ways of defining even a seemingly simple outcome measure such as 
vaccination rates (valid measures include number of children with any vaccinations, proportion of 
children aged 2–5 fully vaccinated, proportion of children vaccinated on time, etc.), these measures are 


usually highly correlated with each other and reviewers will often require the author to show that the 
results hold for valid, alternative ways of defining the outcome.  
A more serious risk of data mining arises when researchers have a concept that has a less precise and 
generally agreed-upon indicator of success as an outcome. Measurement of concepts such as women’s 
empowerment or social capital may require multiple indicators, with no one indicator being obviously 
superior to another. In Casey, Glennerster, and Miguel (2012) for example, we collected over 300 
indicators to measure the impact of the GoBifo program on social capital. If we were to consider these 
indicators separately and run a regression of each potential outcome indicator against our treatment 
dummy, it is likely that by chance we would find a significant relationship between the treatment 
dummy and one of these indicators. Indeed, we demonstrate that it is possible to cherry-pick individual 
outcome indicators which (when taken in isolation) suggest the GoBifo program had positive or negative 
impacts on a particular aspect of social capital. The true effect from a comprehensive examination of 
outcome indicators suggests a precise zero impact. If we report all 300+ regressions it would be pretty 
clear that for the vast majority of outcomes the estimated effect size was zero, and that the few that 
show significant coefficients (some positive and some negative) were probably the result of chance. If, 
however, we ran estimating regressions for 300+ potential outcome variables and reported only those 
where the coefficient was positive and significantly different from zero, we could give the impression 
that the program was effective in changing social capital, when in fact the data do not support this 
conclusion. Running many regressions and only reporting those that produce a significant coefficient is 
often called “data mining,” “phishing,” or “p-hacking.”   
There are three basic approaches that can be used to avoid data mining when there are multiple 
potential ways of defining the main outcome of a study. The first is to combine many outcome variables 
into a few aggregate outcome variables; the second is to adjust p-values for the fact that multiple 
hypotheses are being tested; and the third is to commit in advance to how the data from an experiment 
(or other analysis) will be analyzed.  
The simplest way to combine many potential outcome variables into one is to create an index. We may 
collect many indicators designed to measure wealth, including a series of asset dummies that take the 
value 1 if a household owns a radio, or bike, or TV. Rather than test the impact of a program on each 
individual asset dummy, we create a wealth index that is the mean of all the individual asset dummies. 
We then estimate the impact of the program on the overall wealth index. The same can be done for 
other multifaceted outcome measures. For example, we may ask a series of questions about whether a 
woman is involved in various household decisions. We can create a decision-making index by averaging 
the responses to all these questions. Indices are usually used to combine many similar dummy variables. 
A mean effects approach used by Kling et al. (2007) in their evaluation of Moving to Opportunity is an 
alternative and increasingly popular way to combine outcome indicators that are in a similar “family” of 
outcomes. A family of outcomes may be ones that all ask about health or education or another similarly 
broad topic. To estimate a mean effects, all the variables in a family need to be placed on a similar scale 
so that each has the same mean (zero), standard deviation, and direction (negative should be bad for all 


variables, and positive good). We then run a linked set of estimations on the new set of variables, and 
the “mean effect” is the average of all the coefficients in the set of linked estimations.  
An index of mean effects can be used to reduce the number of outcome measures for which we 
estimate a treatment effect. Having reduced our hypotheses to a manageable number, we can adjust 
the p-values for the fact that we are testing several related hypotheses. The Bonferroni correction is the 
simplest way to do this but it suffers from low power: we may fail to reject the null even when we 
should. A better approach is to use the free step-down resampling method for the family-wise error rate 
(Westfall and Young 1993 are credited with the approach, and Anderson 2008 provides a good 
explanation of its use). One advantage of this latter approach is that it takes into account that the 
outcome variables may be correlated with each other. 
Adjusting p-values when we present different outcome measures is not always necessary or 
appropriate. Some hypotheses are clearly secondary and are designed to illustrate the mechanism 
through which the main effect was achieved (or was not achieved). In Banerjee et al. (2010) we 
evaluated a Pratham program designed to increase reading levels by providing information to parents 
about the poor reading levels of students and ways in which they could advocate for change. We 
collected outcomes on whether the information was provided to parents, whether parents changed 
their beliefs about how much their child was learning, whether parents put in more effort to monitor 
schools or advocate for more education resources, whether more resources were secured for schools, 
and whether test scores increased. We created families of outcomes for variables associated with each 
step in the process, but we did not collapse them into one family, nor did we adjust the p-values for the 
fact that we had several families. This is because even though we found statistically significant results 
for the first two outcomes (information sessions happened and parents were more informed) we did not 
declare the program a success because the causal chain clearly stopped at this point. Being better-
informed did not lead to more effort, resources, or outcomes. In other words, results are always judged 
in the context of theory, and this can be an important barrier to data mining.    
The other key area where data mining is a particular risk (and being accused of data mining is a serious 
risk) is subgroup testing. As with multiple outcomes, testing for differential effects among subgroups 
raises concerns about multiple hypotheses. If we simply test for effects in every possible subgroup, we 
will likely find one with a significant treatment effect. One option is to adjust p-values for the number of 
subgroups tested. A better approach is to have a clear motivating theory behind why some subgroups 
will react differently than others. For example, if we are evaluating a program that provides incentives 
for girls to stay in school and we find that the program had a bigger effect on girls who are within 
walking distance of a secondary school than those who are not, this will strengthen our confidence in 
the overall result.   
Preanalysis plans 
Perhaps the most robust way to avoid data mining, or being accused of data mining, is to commit in 
advance to how the data from a field experiment will be analyzed by creating a preanalysis plan (PAP). A 
PAP can be a useful complement to the strategies discussed above. For example, if we plan to create 


five families from 300+ outcome variables, we have a large amount of discretion about how to divide 
them up unless we commit in advance which variables will go into which families. It is hard to credibly 
adjust our p-values for the number of regressions run unless we commit in advance to exactly which 
regressions we intend to run (without this we could run more and only pick the ones that were 
significant, and then adjusting our p-values for those would be meaningless). Similarly, if we want to 
adjust our p-values for the number of subgroup analyses we run, it is important to state at the start 
which subgroups we intend to test. 
There has been an increase in the use of PAPs among those doing field experiments, but they are far 
from the norm. Many economists feel PAPs are too constraining, that authors discover important truths 
in the data that they could not have predicted prior to their examination of it, and that it would be 
wrong not to pursue these revelations. Others worry that “following the data” in this way can lead 
researchers to find patterns that are there just by chance and that tying their hands in advance is useful.   
Writing a PAP is not without costs. It is a time-consuming and difficult process. It is hard to think through 
what additional tests should be carried out under each combination of possible results, especially when 
a trial has multiple arms. As Olken (2015) explains, “Most research papers test a large number of 
hypotheses. Hypotheses themselves are often conditional on the realization of other, previous 
hypothesis tests: the precise statistical question a paper might test in Table 4 depends on the answer 
that was found in Table 3; the question posed in Table 5 might depend on the answer in Table 4, and so 
on.”  
There is nothing to stop a researcher from including results to questions that were not posed in the PAP 
in a paper. These can be considered exploratory rather than confirmatory. However, most readers will 
put less weight on these results than they would put on a result in a paper without a PAP. While the 
abstract scientific model would suggest that subsequent research can follow up such exploratory results 
with confirmatory tests, Olken notes that such follow-up work is less common in economics than in 
medicine, not least because funding for economic research is a fraction of that in medicine. Olken also 
argues that there is an opportunity cost to researchers thinking through how they would analyze results 
under multiple different scenarios ahead of time and that this may come at the cost of focusing more 
deeply on the one scenario that is revealed once the data is analyzed. This may be less a question of the 
opportunity cost of time than the risk that the PAP process makes a researcher fix ideas ahead of time 
and is thus less flexible to seeing patterns they had not thought of prior to exploring the data. Indeed, 
this "fixing ideas ahead of time" is precisely the benefit of a PAP (it reduces the risk of being persuaded 
by patterns that are there by chance) but also the cost (maybe the patterns are not there by chance, but 
we miss them if we are blinded by our PAP). This is the fundamental trade-off in preanalysis plans.22  
                                                            
22 A related but different issue is that if all the regressions committed to in the PAP are reported in the 
main paper, this can make for a boring read. Imagine for example that treatments 1, 2, and 3 are 
different twists on a base program and the treatment effects on all three are all insignificant from zero, 
as is the coefficient on the pooled outcome and all subgroups. We really do not need to see all of these 
results; we just need to see the result from the three-pooled arms (which has the most precise estimate) 


Given these trade-offs, the most common use of PAPs is for field experiments in which there is no 
obvious single, primary outcome variable, or where the authors know that subgroup analysis will be a 
critical part of their paper and are nervous of being accused of data mining. Given the complexity of 
doing PAPs in multi-arm studies, PAPs are also more common in one-arm trials. PAPs are also used by 
researchers to help manage relationships with partners. It can be very helpful to have a written 
document that clarifies what outcome the partner hopes or expects to see and would count as success. 
This can prevent awkward discussions later in which the partner wants to cherry-pick positive findings. 
These partner/researcher documents do not necessarily have to be as detailed as a full PAP to be useful 
(an example of a broad partner/researcher agreement followed by a detailed PAP can be found in Casey, 
Glennerster, and Miguel 2013). 
Olken (2015) provides a useful checklist for what should be included in a PAP: 
 
Source: Olken 2015 
One issue that is still debated within economics is the best time during the research process to write a 
PAP. A purist approach would suggest that the PAP should be written before the start of the experiment, 
but it is not clear that this is optimal. Casey et al., for example, argue that there are several advantages 
                                                                                                                                                                                               
and a footnote saying none are significant when run separately, and none of the subgroups are 
significant.  Some authors put all the results specified in the PAP in an appendix but do not necessarily 
show them all in the main text to help with this problem. 
 


to waiting: the literature may have advanced during the trial which may raise additional hypotheses that 
can be tested with the data generated in the trial; observations on the ground may also generate 
additional hypotheses that can be tested, including unforeseen negative impacts of the intervention; 
and the process of baseline data collection can also inform the researcher about which outcome 
variables are well measured and for which outcome measures there is room for improvement.  
In FDA-regulated trials, only the primary and secondary outcome variables are specified prior to the 
start of the trial, while the detailed data handling and analysis plan is written after the endline data are 
collected, but before the data are combined with information on which observations are treatment and 
which are comparison (Olken 2015). This allows the researcher to determine the best-fit specification 
prior to including treatment status, or drop outliers before the researcher knows whether the outliers 
are treatment or control. Some economists have used this approach (Olken in particular recommends 
it), while others prefer to set the PAP before the endline is collected. Bidwell, Casey, and Glennerster 
(2015) use a multi-stage PAP for a paper that included several rounds of data collection: an initial 
overarching PAP was written and was then updated at prespecified times after the analysis of a given 
data set raised hypotheses which could then be tested in subsequent data sets.  
A number of PAPs for field experiments are now publicly available and are worth examining before 
writing one for the first time. Some of the early PAPs in economics can be found at 
http://www.povertyactionlab.org/Hypothesis-Registry. These include PAPs for Targeting the Poor 
(published as Alatas et al. 2012), GoBifo (published as Casey et al. 2012) and the Oregon Health 
Insurance Experiment (published as Finkelstein et al. 2012). Since the opening of the AEA Registry, new 
PAPs in economics have been published at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/.  
Evidence on the magnitude of the problem 
Increasing the transparency and reproducibility of research results is not costless. Preparing data for 
publication takes time that could be devoted to doing new studies. The same is true of reanalyzing data 
and running reproduction and extension studies. Whether these costs are worth incurring depends in 
part on how big the problems are compared to the costs. Estimating the magnitude of the problem is 
not easy. We cannot judge the magnitude of the problem by examining published studies of replication 
or reanalyses and asking how many of these published articles find the study replicates and how many 
claim to have found a failure to replicate. Replication or reproducibility efforts can be subject to the 
same issues of publication bias and data mining. If anything, the incentives for publication bias and data 
mining may be worse for reproduction studies than for original studies. A zero effect in an original study 
may not be as exciting as a large positive or negative impact, but it is at least a new finding. If a 
replication study finds exactly the same effect as the original study it does not even have the benefit of 
being news and an author may well not put a lot of effort into trying to get it published, or worse may 
attempt to manipulate the results to show that the original finding is not robust. In other cases, 
replication studies have been much less well powered than the original study. Failing to find a significant 
effect in a low-powered study when the original study found a significant effect is not a “failure to 
replicate” as is too often claimed. Simonsohn (2015) also points out that testing whether the two 
estimated-effect sizes in the different papers are significantly different from each other may also not be 


a good way to judge if a the new study fails to replicate the first study. He suggests that the appropriate 
standard is whether the replication results are consistent, i.e., that there is an effect size that is large 
enough to be detectable by the original study. Simonsohn argues that much of the evidence for bias in 
the psychology literature is based on inappropriate tests. For example, all ten of the most cited studies 
in psychology that use “failure to replicate” in their title use as their test whether the replication study is 
significantly different from zero even though the replication studies often have substantially smaller 
samples than the original study. 
A way round this publication bias in replications is to define a specific set of studies that are to be 
reanalyzed or reproduced and set clear standards in advance about how the reanalysis or reproducibility 
is to be judged. An additional benefit of this approach is that there is little incentive among the 
reproducers to either confirm or undermine the initial result: the result will surprise some people 
whether the finding is that many studies can be reproduced or few can be reproduced. 
Two large initiatives to reproduce findings from psychology studies have recently concluded. Klein et al. 
(2014) had multiple labs retest important findings in psychology. Some of the labs were in the same 
country as the original experiment (i.e., were reproductions, in Clemens’ parlance) and some were on 
new populations (extensions, according to Clemens’ definition). Of the 13 original findings, similar 
results were found for ten, reasonably similar results were found for one, and in two cases there was 
little evidence of a consistent result holding either in the original or new population. The effect sizes in 
the replications were sometimes larger and sometimes smaller than the original. Combined, these 
results are rather encouraging.  
A second initiative in psychology looked at a larger number of studies (100) but attempted to reproduce 
them only once and mostly on similar populations (Open Science Collaboration 2015). With one original 
study and one reproduction where the results are not consistent, it is not possible to say which is the 
correct result. However, it is possible to examine patterns across the many pairs of original and 
reproduction studies. As Figure 3 shows it is possible for a replication to find an effect size of similar 
magnitude to the original study but not be significantly different from zero. It is also possible for the 
replication to generate an effect size that is significantly different from zero but not be of similar 
magnitude. Neither is a good measure of reproducibility on its own. However, what Figure 3 also shows 
is that, on average, replication studies had substantially lower estimated-effect sizes than original 
studies and had substantially lower significance. This is true even if we look just at the studies with high 
power. Combined, these results raise important concerns about reproducibility. What explains the 
difference between the findings of these two initiatives is unclear. One possible theory is that Klein et al. 
looked at more famous results, and that these results are famous for a reason.  This contention is 
supported by Dreber et al. 2015, which shows psychology researchers unable to predict reasonably well 
which of the one hundred studies would replicate. 
 


 
Figure 3 
No such well-structured, systematic attempt to reproduce economics studies has been undertaken. 
Instead, Brodeur et al. (2015) use a different approach to estimating the bias in field experiments in 
economics. If researchers data mine to tip their results just above a critical significance level of 5 or 10 
percent, or if studies with results under these levels are less likely to be published, there will be few 
published results just below these cutoffs. By examining empirical studies form three top journals (AER, 
JEP and QJE) between 2005–2011, Brodeur et al. find evidence of this “missing mass” just below 
conventional significance levels in nonrandomized studies in economics, but not in field experiments. 
Olken (2015) argues that even the level of manipulation observed in nonrandomized studies in 
economics suggested by the missing mass is not substantial. Brodeur et al. estimate that 10-20 percent 
of p-values below 0.05 should in fact be between 0.10 and 0.25. Olken points out that this means that of 
a hundred studies, instead of having five false rejections we would have 7.25 false rejections. He argues 
that while this is not an ideal outcome, it suggests that actions to address publication bias and data 
mining should only be taken if they do not impose a large cost on research. 
Why do we not see more evidence of p-hacking? One explanation is that the long process economics 
papers go through prior to publication helps reduce the ability to p-hack. Papers are typically presented 
many times with robust discussion and criticism. During this and the referee process, if an obvious 
specification is not included in robustness checks, seminar participants and referees will usually ask to 
see it. Authors are not just motivated by how many publications they have but by the respect of their 
peers, and any appearance of twisting the data to get a certain result loses an author that respect. Now 


that data are more commonly published alongside the article, authors may be conscious that others will 
try different robustness checks, and that they will be criticized if the results are not found to be robust. 
Finally, financial stakes are not as high in economics as they are in medicine, where multimillion dollar 
revenue streams rest on a drug or device being found effective.  This does not mean there is no p-
hacking in economics or that the referee system works perfectly; only that we need to keep the 
magnitude of the problem in perspective. 
While Brodeur et al.’s results and similar analyses of the distribution of p-values can tell us about 
manipulation and possible publication bias around specific cutoffs like 0.05, they are not very 
informative of the overall magnitude of publication bias. While Brodeur et al. find fewer studies with p-
value of 80 percent than 4 percent, this does not necessarily signify publication bias; it may signify that 
authors are more likely to test for plausible relationships than implausible relationships. If we want to 
test the magnitude of publication bias, we need to find a defined sample of studies of similar quality 
when they are started and follow up which ones make it to publication. 
Franco, Malhotra, and Simonovits et al. (2014) do exactly this: they follow-up all 221 research proposals 
that won a competitive award to get access to a representative sample of the US population in order to 
run an experiment under the Time-sharing Experiments in the Social Sciences initiative (TESS). Of 49 
studies that produced null results, only ten were published in journals and one as a book chapter. Of 93 
studies with strong results, 56 were published as journal articles and one as a book chapter. Much of the 
difference between the two groups can be explained by whether the authors wrote up the results. For 
example, only seven of the 38 unpublished studies with null results were even written up. The last 
finding may simply be authors internalizing that journals are unlikely to publish the study if it was 
written up. It may also reflect some unobserved heterogeneity in quality of study, although the authors 
argue this is less of a concern given the tough competition to get these grants.  
It is also the case that some findings are less interesting than others, and researchers and journals 
should place more emphasis on important and interesting results. An out-of-the-box idea may be 
interesting if It has a significant impact effect, but not if it has zero effect. This opportunity cost of time 
and journal space has to be set against the costs of publication bias. 
Incentives for replication and transparency 
In this section we discuss the extent to which there are sufficient incentives for researchers undertaking 
field experiments in the social sciences to be transparent, and what, if any, additional incentives should 
be put in place to encourage transparency, reanalysis, robustness testing, reproduction, and extension 
work.  
Of all the strategies for creating greater transparency, registration of field experiments is probably the 
least costly: it takes little time and is unlikely to distort research.23 Because it is not hard it may not 
                                                            
23 Coffman and Niederle (2015) suggest that a possible cost of registries is that authors may not want to share their 
research designs before the paper is published. However, the AEA registry allows authors to hide details of design 
until the paper is published. 


require large incentives. However, as the benefits are public, a nudge is appropriate, especially to get 
experiments registered early. Increasingly, funders and research-implementing organizations are 
requiring registration. 
As discussed above, PAPs are hard and costly, and there is little evidence of statistical data mining in 
field experiments in economics. The main incentive to do a PAP is for the author to protect themselves 
from accusations of data mining. Further incentives at this stage are unlikely to be warranted. 
The benefits of data publication are potentially larger, as it allows for checks of robustness and fraud, 
and allows others to do research on related issues. The costs to researchers are reasonably high, but are 
one-time costs. Publication does not distort research inappropriately. It is here that incentives should be 
focused. 
Twenty or even ten years ago there was little expectation amongst economists that the data behind a 
paper would be made available at the time of publication. There were exceptions. For example, the 
MacArthur Foundation Network on Inequality in the late 1990s funded a series of studies in 
development, including some of the early field experiments, and required that data from all the studies 
were published. It was also the case that many economists in development felt obliged to make their 
data available when others requested it.  
The incentives to make data publicly available have increased rapidly. In 2004, the American Economic 
Review started requiring authors to make public the data and replication code in support of the tables in 
the published paper. Most top journals followed (the Quarterly Journal of Economics is currently an 
exception), as well as applied field journals like the Journal of Labor Economics and the Journal of 
Development Economics. Knowing data publication will be required if the paper does well can encourage 
good data management and documentation along the way, which then makes the task of publication 
easier. Many funders, including the International Initiative on Impact Evaluation, the Arnold Foundation, 
and the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab, require studies they fund to publish their data.  
Exactly what counts as data publication is still debated. Most economics journals only require authors to 
post the part of the data set that is necessary to replicate the tables in the paper. Nor do they require 
the original raw data to be posted. This means that some robustness checks cannot be carried out (for 
example, whether the result holds when controlling for a variable that is collected but not included in 
the controls and thus not published). It also means that some manipulation can happen during the 
creation of aggregate variables or in “cleaning” the data. But it is not clear that posting raw data is in 
fact more transparent. Most raw data requires so much work that it is impenetrable to anyone not 
involved in the study. Even if the raw data and the code to turn it into clean data is posted, the cleaning 
files will be so long and tedious that it is unlikely anyone will learn anything useful from them. As an 
example, in a nationally representative survey of smallholder agriculture in Sierra Leone, cleaning 
involved thousands of manual corrects for double-entry reconciliation errors, as well as turning a dozen 
different local ways of measuring output into a common standard. It would be hard for another 
researcher to comment on how much bigger a Kenema buttercup is than a Bo buttercup and how many 


there are in a bushel). In psychology, authors have pointed out that some raw data consists of brain 
scans and posting all the brain scans in a study would be infeasible.   
More concerning is the finding from Chang and Li 2015 detailed above that many studies published in 
journals with data publication requirements do not have sufficient information posted to allow authors 
to reproduce the results in the paper. In addition, many data sets sit unpublished for lack of a few days 
additional work, even though this is a tiny proportion of the work that went into collecting, cleaning, 
and analyzing data. These data represent an important public good: in addition to being useful in 
checking the validity of published findings, they can be used by other researchers to calculate 
intracluster correlations for power calculations, combine with other data to do new analysis, publish 
descriptive studies, or explore relationships not explored by the original authors. An effort is now 
underway by various institutions including the Berkeley Initiative for Transparency in Social Sciences 
(BITSS), Innovations for Poverty Action, and the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab, to provide 
assistance and financial incentives to get more data published. Papers such as Chang and Li, which audit 
journals' implementation of publication rules, are also useful. 
Should anything be done to incentivize the researchers to use data that are published? One position is 
that academic incentives are skewed towards producing new studies and thus there is not enough 
checking of existing studies. This was one reason that 3ie launched their project to fund researchers to 
attempt to verify existing studies. As we discussed above, however, many criticized this attempt: the 
incentives were for those doing the verification and robustness checks to find problems and the results 
were published on the 3ie website without going through peer review; verification attempts that found 
no issues appear to be less likely to be published; and there were accusations that verification authors 
departed from their preanalysis plans. (In the interests of full disclosure I am married to Michael Kremer 
whose paper was part of this process and the comment on which started the worm wars.) 
PhD students undertaking verification as part of their studies is widely regarded as less subject to 
incentive problems. Students learn a lot from the process and will do as well in the class if they achieve 
verification as if they find an error. The only disadvantage is that there is no public record of what 
papers are verified in this way: The profession has a sense that many papers are tested and only a few 
headline errors have come out, but no one knows for sure how many have been tested. This lack of a 
record also means that different classes may be verifying the same paper again and again while others 
go unverified. Professors teaching these classes have expressed concern in going public with the results 
of all their students' work, explaining that students don’t always have the time or the ability to do a 
thorough verification job. Nevertheless, a simple record of which papers have been the subject of 
scrutiny in a given class, without indicating the results, could be a useful step towards transparency. If a 
paper has been examined in multiple classes without any published comment about potential errors, 
this could help increase confidence in the result even if no one student paper should be taken as 
meaning a clean bill of health. 
An even lower pressure, incentive-aligned strategy is to have the verification take place before 
publication. Authors could submit data and code to an independent team that attempts to verify the 
analysis prior to publication. This could be done through journals themselves or through independent 


groups. Again, PhD students or postdocs might be happy to do this work if it was as well paid as teaching 
assistant jobs, providing them with the income they need to pursue their own research.    
This leaves the more complex and expensive problem of encouraging reproductions or extensions, i.e., 
running a new experiment in either the same/similar or a different population. Coffman and Niederle 
(2015) conclude that reproductions are particularly helpful. They address issues of p-hacking, errors in 
data and analysis, and the risk that a result is due to chance. They consider them less distortionary to 
the research process than PAPs, which they argue have considerable costs in preventing flexibility in 
analysis. They recognize, however, that large field experiments may be too expensive and hard to 
undertake multiple times. Additionally, academics may not have the incentive to do the second, third, or 
fourth study on a given issue. One approach is to fund well-coordinated efforts that test an approach in 
many different contexts at once.  The resulting collection of results may well attract significant attention 
and academic reward. For example, the coordinated series of studies on the graduation approach 
pioneer by BRAC was published in Science (Banerjee et al. 2015). These coordinated approaches are 
expensive and hard. They face the constant tension between the goal of testing a very standardized 
program across contexts and allowing the program to be adapted to local needs and preferences. 
Coffman and Niederle (2015) propose having a new journal that only publishes reproductions and 
possibly extensions. This has the advantage that the new studies are peer-reviewed for quality and 
authors know there is an academic outlet for their reproduction studies. A particularly interesting part 
of their suggestion is that any subsequent citation of the original study could be followed with notation 
indicating whether the result has been reproduced (R+ for one that has been successfully reproduced; R- 
for one that has been unsuccessfully reproduced). This means there are some upsides for the original 
author in having their study reproduced. They admit there are many issues to sort out, such as what 
counts as a successful reproduction. They also note that reproductions are likely to be more common for 
studies that are cheap to run. We would add this approach is more useful when the intervention is very 
clearly defined, as this is the only way to ensure that exactly the same intervention is being tested in the 
original and the reproduction. Very large, complex, and expensive studies may never, or rarely, have an 
attempted reproduction. Another, decentralized approach, which is currently more typical in economics, 
is for different researchers to test the predictions of a single theory in different ways in different 
contexts. The theory-driven approach is less useful for testing programs with complex interdependent 
components, as in the graduation program, where multisite studies may be more useful. The 
decentralized theory-driven testing is more likely to remain more prevalent, and academics continue to 
have strong incentives to test theories posed in one paper in similar and different contexts. 
The debate about increased transparency and reproducibility in economics too often fails to apply this 
more theoretical lens, and in doing so can give the impression that we know less than we do. For 
example, we may have few exact replicas testing whether the incentives for immunization program in 
India tested by Banerjee, Duflo, Glennerster and Kothari (2010) “works” in other countries. But we do 
have multiple studies from different countries testing the same underlying hypothesis that small 
changes in price (both positive and negative) can have surprisingly large impacts on the take-up of 
health prevention products (for a summary, see Kremer and Holla 2008 and Kremer and Glennerster 
2011).  Similarly, the recent series of studies on the impact of providing voters information about 


candidates prior to elections all test whether voting is purely clientalistic (Fujiwara and Wantchekon 
2013; Bidwell. Casey and Glennerster 2015; Ferraz and Finan 2007; and Banerjee et. al 2010). We would 
not want to provide exactly the same information to voters in the same way in different countries. Nor 
would we want to test whether the coefficient found in later (“replication”) studies were significantly 
lower than those in earlier (“original”) studies, or test if one study is within the margin of error of that 
found in another study. However, the fact that studies in different developing countries have 
consistently found information provision changes how people vote provides us with more confidence in 
the reliability of the finding than one study on its own.  
The classic approach in economics is, instead of testing whether a program “works” across contexts, to 
test whether theories hold in a variety of situations.    
Conclusion 
Field experiments are hard to do well, and the majority of blood, sweat, and tears come in the details of 
implementation. Poor judgment during any one of the thousands of small decisions can undermine the 
entire venture. Attention to detail is critical. A miscommunication with a partner can lead to the 
randomization protocol not being followed, an underestimated budget will mean the project cannot be 
completed as envisaged, a badly worded survey question can lead to an ambiguous outcome measure, 
low take-up can cause the experiment to be underpowered, or a survey conducted at the wrong time of 
year can lead to high attrition rate. The role of the researcher is not just to design the evaluation, but to 
be on top of these practical decisions through the process, from design to data publication.  
 
Bibliography 
Aiken, Alexander M, Calum Davey, James R Hargreaves, and Richard J Hayes. 2015. “Re-Analysis of Health and 
Educational Impacts of a School-Based Deworming Programme in Western Kenya: A Pure Replication.” 
International Journal of Epidemiology, July, dyv127. doi:10.1093/ije/dyv127. 
Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A Olken, Ririn Purnamasari, and Matthew Wai-Poi. 2013. “Ordeal 
Mechanisms in Targeting: Theory and Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia.” National Bureau of 
Economic Research. 
Alderman, Harold, Jishnu Das, and Vijayendra Rao. 2013. “Conducting Ethical Economic Research: Complications from 
the Field.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, no. 6446. 
Allcott, Hunt. 2015. “Site Selection Bias in Program Evaluation.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (3): 1117–65. 
doi:10.1093/qje/qjv015. 
Anderson, Michael L. 2008. “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early Intervention: A 
Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects.” Journal of the American Statistical 
Association 103 (484). 
Angrist, Joshua, Eric Bettinger, and Michael Kremer. 2006. “Long-Term Educational Consequences of Secondary School 
Vouchers: Evidence from Administrative Records in Colombia.” The American Economic Review, 847–62. 
Angrist, Joshua D. 1990. “Lifetime Earnings and the Vietnam Era Draft Lottery: Evidence from Social Security 
Administrative Records.” The American Economic Review, 313–36. 
Ashraf, Nava, James Berry, and Jesse M Shapiro. 2010. “Can Higher Prices Stimulate Product Use? Evidence from a Field 
Experiment in Zambia.” American Economic Review 100 (5): 2383–2413. doi:10.1257/aer.100.5.2383. 
Baird, Sarah, Joan Hamory, and Edward Miguel. 2008. “Tracking, Attrition and Data Quality in the Kenyan Life Panel 
Survey Round 1 (KLPS-1).” Center for International and Development Economics Research. 


Banerjee, Abhijit, Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, Esther Duflo, Daniel Keniston, and Nina Singh. 2012. “Improving Police 
Performance in Rajasthan, India: Experimental Evidence on Incentives, Managerial Autonomy and Training.” 
w17912. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/w17912.pdf. 
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Cynthia Kinnan. 2015. “The Miracle of Microfinance? Evidence 
from a Randomized Evaluation †.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7 (1): 22–53. 
doi:10.1257/app.20130533. 
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Nathanael Goldberg, Dean Karlan, Robert Osei, William Parienté, Jeremy Shapiro, Bram 
Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry. 2015. “A Multifaceted Program Causes Lasting Progress for the Very Poor: 
Evidence from Six Countries.” Science 348 (6236): 1260799. 
Banerjee, Abhijit, Selvan Kumar, Rohini Pande, and Felix Su. 2010. “Do Informed Voters Make Better Choices? 
Experimental Evidence from Urban India.” Unpublished Manuscript. Http://www. Povertyactionlab. org/node/2764. 
Banerjee, Abhijit V, Rukmini Banerji, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Stuti Khemani. 2010. “Pitfalls of 
Participatory Programs: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Education in India.” American Economic 
Journal: Economic Policy, 1–30. 
Banerjee, A. V., E. Duflo, R. Glennerster, and D. Kothari. 2010. “Improving Immunisation Coverage in Rural India: 
Clustered Randomised Controlled Evaluation of Immunisation Campaigns with and without Incentives.” BMJ 340 
(may17 1): c2220–c2220. doi:10.1136/bmj.c2220. 
Barrett, Christopher B, and Michael R Carter. 2014. “Retreat from Radical Skepticism: Rebalancing Theory, 
Observational Data and Randomization in Development Economics.” Field Experiments and Their Critics: Essays 
on the Uses and Abuses of Experimentation in the Social Sciences, 58–77. 
Beaman, Lori, Niall Keleher, and Jeremy Magruder. 2013. “Do Job Networks Disadvantage Women? Evidence from a 
Recruitment Experiment in Malawi.” Working Paper, Department of Economics, Northwestern University. 
Beath, Andrew, Fotini Christia, and Ruben Enikolopov. 2013. “Winning Hearts and Minds through Development: 
Evidence from a Field Experiment in Afghanistan.” In . 
Bidwell, Kelly, Katherine Casey, and Rachel Glennerster. 2015. “Debates: The Impact of Voter Knowledge Initiatives in 
Sierra Leone,” Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab Working Paper, , June. 
http://www.povertyactionlab.org/publication/debates-impact-voter-knowledge-initiatives-sierra-leone. 
Blattman, Chris. 2015. “Dear Journalists and Policymakers: What You Need to Know about the Worm Wars.” Chris 
Blattman Blog. October 23. http://chrisblattman.com/2015/07/23/dear-journalists-and-policymakers-what-you-need-
to-know-about-the-worm-wars/. 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Andrew C. Chang, and Phillip Li. 2015. “Is Economics Research 
Replicable? Sixty Published Papers from Thirteen Journals Say ‘Usually Not.’” Finance and Economics Discussion 
Series 2015 (83): 1–26. doi:10.17016/FEDS.2015.083. 
Brodeur, Abel, Mathias Lé, Marc Sangnier, and Yanos Zylberberg. 2016. “Star Wars: The Empirics Strike Back.” 
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8 (1).  
Broockman, David, J Kalla, and P Aronow. 2015. “Irregularities in LaCour (2014).” 
Bruhn, Miriam, and David McKenzie. 2009. “In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in Practice in Development Field 
Experiments.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (4): 200–232. doi:10.1257/app.1.4.200. 
Callaway, Ewen. 2011. “Report Finds Massive Fraud at Dutch Universities.” Nature 479 (7371): 15–15. 
doi:10.1038/479015a. 
Casey, K., R. Glennerster, and E. Miguel. 2012. “Reshaping Institutions: Evidence on Aid Impacts Using a Preanalysis 
Plan.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (4): 1755–1812. doi:10.1093/qje/qje027. 
Chandrasekhar, Arun, Cynthia Kinnan, and Horacio Larreguy. 2015. “Social Networks as Contract Enforcement: 
Evidence from a Lab Experiment in the Field,” Working Paper, . Accessed October 27. 
http://faculty.wcas.northwestern.edu/~cgk281/SaI.pdf. 
Chattopadhyay, Raghabendra, and Esther Duflo. 2004. “Women as Policy Makers: Evidence from a Randomized Policy 
Experiment in India.” Econometrica 72 (5): 1409–43. 
Clemens, Michael A. 2015. “The Meaning of Failed Replications: A Review and Proposal.” Institute for the Study of 
Labor (IZA). 
Coffman, Lucas C., and Muriel Niederle. 2015. “Pre-Analysis Plans Have Limited Upside, Especially Where Replications 
Are Feasible.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 29 (3): 81–98. doi:10.1257/jep.29.3.81. 
Cohen, Jessica, and Pascaline Dupas. 2010. “Free Distribution or Cost-Sharing? Evidence from a Randomized Malaria 
Prevention Experiment *.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (1): 1–45. doi:10.1162/qjec.2010.125.1.1. 
Cole, Shawn Allen, and A. Nilesh Fernando. 2012. “The Value of Advice: Evidence from Mobile Phone-Based 
Agricultural Extension.” SSRN Electronic Journal. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2179008. 


Crépon, Bruno, Esther Duflo, Marc Gurgand, Roland Rathelot, and Philippe Zamora. 2012. “Do Labor Market Policies 
Have Displacement Effects? Evidence from a Clustered Randomized Experiment.” w18597. Cambridge, MA: 
National Bureau of Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/w18597.pdf. 
Davey, Calum, Alexander M Aiken, Richard J Hayes, and James R Hargreaves. 2015. “Re-Analysis of Health and 
Educational Impacts of a School-Based Deworming Programme in Western Kenya: A Statistical Replication of a 
Cluster Quasi-Randomized Stepped-Wedge Trial.” International Journal of Epidemiology, July, dyv128. 
doi:10.1093/ije/dyv128. 
Dhaliwal, Iqbal, and Rema Hanna. 2014. “Deal with the Devil: The Successes and Limitations of Bureaucratic Reform in 
India.” National Bureau of Economic Research. 
Donohue, J. J., and S. D. Levitt. 2001. “The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime.” The Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 116 (2): 379–420. doi:10.1162/00335530151144050. 
Donohue, John, and Steven Levitt. 2006. “Measurement Error, Legalized Abortion, and the Decline in Crime: A Response 
to Foote and Goetz (2005).” w11987. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. 
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11987.pdf. 
Dreber, A., T. Pfeiffer, J. Almenberg, S. Isaksson, B. Wilson, Y. Chen, B. A. Nosek, and M. Johannesson. 2015. “Using 
Prediction Markets to Estimate the Reproducibility of Scientific Research.” Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, November. doi:10.1073/pnas.1516179112. 
Duflo, Esther, William Gale, Jeffrey Liebman, Peter Orszag, and Emmanuel Saez. 2005. “Saving Incentives for Low-and 
Middle-Income Families: Evidence from a Field Experiment with H&R Block.” National Bureau of Economic 
Research. 
Duflo, Esther, and Emmanuel Saez. 2002. “Participation and Investment Decisions in a Retirement Plan: The Influence of 
Colleagues’ Choices.” Journal of Public Economics 85 (1): 121–48. doi:10.1016/S0047-2727(01)00098-6. 
Fearon, James D, Macartan Humphreys, and Jeremy M Weinstein. 2009. “Can Development Aid Contribute to Social 
Cohesion after Civil War? Evidence from a Field Experiment in Post-Conflict Liberia.” The American Economic 
Review, 287–91. 
Ferraz, Claudio, and Frederico Finan. 2007. “Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The Effects of Brazil’s Publicly Released 
Audits on Electoral Outcomes.” 
Field, Erica, Rachel Glennerster, Shahana Nazneen, Svetlana Pimkana, and Iman Sen. Forthcoming. “The Effect Of 
Financial Incentives And Girls Empowerment Curriculum On Adolescent Marriage And Schooling In Rural 
Bangladesh: A Clustered Randomized Controlled Trial.” Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, Working 
Paper. 
Field, Erica, Rohini Pande, John Papp, and Y. Jeanette Park. 2012. “Repayment Flexibility Can Reduce Financial Stress: 
A Randomized Control Trial with Microfinance Clients in India.” Edited by Tiziana Leone. PLoS ONE 7 (9): 
e45679. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0045679. 
Finkelstein, A., S. Taubman, B. Wright, M. Bernstein, J. Gruber, J. P. Newhouse, H. Allen, K. Baicker, and Oregon 
Health Study Group. 2012. “The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year.” The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3): 1057–1106. doi:10.1093/qje/qjs020. 
Foote, Christopher L., and Christopher F. Goetz. 2008. “The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime: Comment.” The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (1): 407–23. 
Franco, A., N. Malhotra, and G. Simonovits. 2014. “Publication Bias in the Social Sciences: Unlocking the File Drawer.” 
Science 345 (6203): 1502–5. doi:10.1126/science.1255484. 
Fryer, Jr., Roland. Forthcoming. “Education in Developed Countries.” In Handbook of Field Experiments, edited by 
Esther Duflo and Abhijit Banerjee. 
Fujiwara, Thomas, and Leonard Wantchekon. 2013. “Can Informed Public Deliberation Overcome Clientelism? 
Experimental Evidence from Benin.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (4): 241–55. 
Giné, Xavier, and Dean S Karlan. 2014. “Group versus Individual Liability: Short and Long Term Evidence from 
Philippine Microcredit Lending Groups.” Journal of Development Economics 107: 65–83. 
Glennerster, Rachel, and Shawn Powers. 2016. “Balancing Risk and Benefit: Ethical Tradeoffs in Running Randomized 
Evaluations.” In The Oxford Handbook of Professional Economic Ethics, edited by George F. DeMartino and 
Deirdre N. McCloskey. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Glennerster, Rachel, and Kudzai Takavarasha. 2013. Running Randomized Evaluations: A Practical Guide. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 
Haushofer, Johannes, and Jeremy Shapiro. 2013. “Household Response to Income Changes: Evidence from an 
Unconditional Cash Transfer Program in Kenya.” Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Herndon, Thomas, Michael Ash, and Robert Pollin. 2014. “Does High Public Debt Consistently Stifle Economic Growth? 
A Critique of Reinhart and Rogoff.” Cambridge Journal of Economics 38 (2): 257–79. 


Hicks, Joan Hamory, Michael Kremer, and Edward Miguel. 2015. “Commentary: Deworming Externalities and Schooling 
Impacts in Kenya: A Comment on Aiken et Al. (2015) and Davey et Al. (2015).” International Journal of 
Epidemiology, July, dyv129. doi:10.1093/ije/dyv129. 
Hoffmann, Vivian, Christopher B Barrett, and David R Just. 2009. “Do Free Goods Stick to Poor Households? 
Experimental Evidence on Insecticide Treated Bednets.” World Development 37 (3): 607–17. 
Hoxby, Caroline M. 2000. “Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers?” American 
Economic Review 90 (5): 1209–38. doi:10.1257/aer.90.5.1209. 
———. 2007. “Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers? Reply.” American Economic 
Review 97 (5): 2038–55. doi:10.1257/aer.97.5.2038. 
Humphreys, Macartan. 2014. “How to Make Field Experiments More Ethical.” The Monkey Cage. November 2. 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/wp/2014/11/02/how-to-make-field-experiments-more-ethical/. 
Humphreys, Macartan, Raul Sanchez De La Sierra, and Peter Van Der Windt. 2012. “Social and Economic Impacts of 
Tuungane: Final Report on the Effects of a Community Driven Reconstruction Program in Eastern Democratic 
Republic of Congo.” Unpublished, Department of Political Science, Columbia University. 
Hutton, J. L. 2001. “Are Distinctive Ethical Principles Required for Cluster Randomized Controlled Trials?” Statistics in 
Medicine 20 (3): 473–88. doi:10.1002/1097-0258(20010215)20:3<473::AID-SIM805>3.0.CO;2-D. 
Imbens, Guido. 2011. “Experimental Design for Unit and Cluster Randomized Trials,” International Initiative for Impact 
Evaluation (3ie), Washington, DC. http://cyrussamii.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/Imbens_June_8_paper.pdf. 
Jamison, Dean T., Barbara Searle, Klaus Galda, and Stephen P. Heyneman. 1981a. “Improving Elementary Mathematics 
Education in Nicaragua: An Experimental Study of the Impact of Textbooks and Radio on Achievement.” Journal of 
Educational Psychology 73 (4): 556–67. doi:10.1037/0022-0663.73.4.556. 
———. 1981b. “Improving Elementary Mathematics Education in Nicaragua: An Experimental Study of the Impact of 
Textbooks and Radio on Achievement.” Journal of Educational Psychology 73 (4): 556–67. doi:10.1037/0022-
0663.73.4.556. 
Johnson, Jeremy. 2015. “Campaign Experiment Found to Be in Violation of Montana Law.” The Monkey Cage. May 13. 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/wp/2015/05/13/campaign-experiment-found-to-be-in-
violation-of-montana-law/. 
J-PAL. 2015. Martin Hirsch / Government Panel: Creating Space for Evidence in Policymaking in France. Accessed 
November 9. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gCi60Dyxgws&list=PL5Dr5MK6NSso3iEqn6BDu8OzyMFyLwiNE&index=1
9. 
Karlan, Dean and Jacob Appel. 2016. Failing in the Field: What We Can Learn When Field Experiments Go Wrong. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Zinman. 2010. “Expanding Credit Access: Using Randomized Supply Decisions to Estimate 
the Impacts.” Review of Financial Studies 23 (1): 433–64. doi:10.1093/rfs/hhp092. 
Keniston, Daniel. 2011. “Bargaining and Welfare: A Dynamic Structural Analysis of the Autorickshaw Market.” 
Unpublished Manuscript, Yale University. 
Klein, Richard A., Kate A. Ratliff, Michelangelo Vianello, Reginald B. Adams, Štěpán Bahník, Michael J. Bernstein, 
Konrad Bocian, et al. 2014. “Investigating Variation in Replicability: A ‘Many Labs’ Replication Project.” Social 
Psychology 45 (3): 142–52. doi:10.1027/1864-9335/a000178. 
Kling, Jeffrey R, Jeffrey B Liebman, and Lawrence F Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects.” 
Econometrica 75 (1): 83–119. 
Kremer, Michael, and Rachel Glennerster. 2011. “Improving Health in Developing Countries.” In Handbook of Health 
Economics, 2:201–315. Elsevier. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B9780444535924000049. 
Kremer, Michael, and Alaka Holla. 2008. “Pricing and Access: Lessons from Randomized Evaluation in Education and 
Health.” In . Citeseer. 
Kremer, M., and E. Miguel. 2007. “The Illusion of Sustainability.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (3): 1007–65. 
doi:10.1162/qjec.122.3.1007. 
Leamer, Edward E. 1983. “Let’s Take the Con out of Econometrics.” The American Economic Review, 31–43. 
Maynard, Rebecca A. 2015. “Fighting for Reliable Evidence, by Judith Gueron and Howard Rolston, New York, NY: 
Russell Sage Foundation, 2013, 596 Pp., $49.45, Paperback.: Book Reviews.” Journal of Policy Analysis and 
Management 34 (1): 243–47. doi:10.1002/pam.21801. 
McNutt, M. 2015. “Editorial Retraction.” Science 348 (6239): 1100–1100. doi:10.1126/science.aac6638. 
McRae, Andrew D, Charles Weijer, Ariella Binik, Angela White, Jeremy M Grimshaw, Robert Boruch, Jamie C Brehaut, 
et al. 2011. “Who Is the Research Subject in Cluster Randomized Trials in Health Research?” Trials 12 (1): 183. 
doi:10.1186/1745-6215-12-183. 


Meager, Rachael. 2015. “Understanding the Impact of Microcredit Expansions: A Bayesian Hierarchical Analysis of 7 
Randomised Experiments.” MIT Working Paper, August. http://economics.mit.edu/files/10595. 
Miguel, Edward, and Michael Kremer. 2004. “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health in the Presence of 
Treatment Externalities.” Econometrica 72 (1): 159–217. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0262.2004.00481.x. 
Miguel, Ted. 2015. “Introduction to Economics 270D.” presented at the Econ 270D: Research Transparency in the Social 
Sciences, University of California, Berkeley. http://emiguel.econ.berkeley.edu/assets/miguel_courses/12/Lectures-
PDF.zip. 
Mobarak, Ahmed Mushfiq, and Mark Rosenzweig. 2014. “Risk, Insurance and Wages in General Equilibrium.” National 
Bureau of Economic Research. 
Motl, Jonathan. 2014. Decision finding sufficient facts to demonstrate a violation of Montana’s campaign practice laws. 
Commissioner  of Political Practices of the State of Montana. 
Muralidharan, Karthik, Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar. 2014. “Building State Capacity: Evidence from Biometric 
Smartcards in India.” National Bureau of Economic Research. 
Olken, Benjamin A. 2015. “Promises and Perils of Pre-Analysis Plans.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 29 (3): 61–
80. 
Olken, Benjamin A., Junko Onishi, and Susan Wong. 2014. “Should Aid Reward Performance? Evidence from a Field 
Experiment on Health and Education in Indonesia †.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6 (4): 1–34. 
doi:10.1257/app.6.4.1. 
Open Science Collaboration. 2015. “Estimating the Reproducibility of Psychological Science.” Science 349 (6251): 
aac4716–aac4716. doi:10.1126/science.aac4716. 
Ozler, Berk. 2014. “How Scientific Are Scientific Replications?” World Bank Blog. October 15. 
http://blogs.worldbank.org/impactevaluations/how-scientific-are-scientific-replications. 
Ravallion, Martin. 2012. “Fighting Poverty One Experiment at a Time: A Review of Abhijit Banerjee and Esther Duflo’s 
Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight Global Poverty.” Journal of Economic Literature 50 (1): 
103–14. doi:10.1257/jel.50.1.103. 
“‘Research Network on Economic Equality & Social Interactions,’ MacArthur Foundation, Accessed November 10, 2015, 
Https:/.” n.d. 
Ridker, Paul M, and Jose Torres. 2006. “Reported Outcomes in Major Cardiovascular Clinical Trials Funded by For-Profit 
and Not-for-Profit Organizations: 2000-2005.” JAMA 295 (19): 2270. doi:10.1001/jama.295.19.2270. 
Rogoff, Kenneth. 2013. “FAQ on Herndon, Ash and Pollin’s Critique of ‘Growth in a Time of Debt.’” Technical report. 
unpublished mimeo available on Rogoff’s website at http://tinyurl. com/ot8h53e, October. 
Rogoff, Kenneth, and Carmen Reinhart. 2010. “Growth in a Time of Debt.” American Economic Review 100 (2): 573–78. 
Rosenthal, Robert. 1979. “The File Drawer Problem and Tolerance for Null Results.” Psychological Bulletin 86 (3): 638–
41. doi:10.1037//0033-2909.86.3.638. 
Rothstein, Jesse. 2004. “Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers? A Comment on 
Hoxby (2000).” SSRN Electronic Journal. doi:10.2139/ssrn.692582. 
Simonsohn, Uri. 2015. “Small Telescopes Detectability and the Evaluation of Replication Results.” Psychological 
Science, 0956797614567341. 
Thomas, Duncan, Elizabeth Frankenberg, Jed Friedman, Jean-Pierre Habicht, Mohammed Hakimi, Nathan Jones Jaswadi, 
Gretel Pelto, Bondan Sikoki, Teresa Seeman, and James P Smith. 2003. “Iron Deficiency and the Well-Being of 
Older Adults: Early Results from a Randomized Nutrition Intervention.” In . 
Vivalt, Eva. 2015. “How Much Can We Generalize from Impact Evaluations?” Unpublished Manuscript, New York 
University. 
Westfall, Peter H., and S. Stanley Young. 1993. Resampling-Based Multiple Testing: Examples and Methods for P-Value 
Adjustment. Wiley Series in Probability and Mathematical Statistics. New York: Wiley. 
Zywicki, Todd J. 2007. “Institutional Review Boards as Academic Bureaucracies: An Economic and Experiential 
Analysis.” Nw. UL Rev. 101: 861. 
 
