The Physics of Quantum Mechanics
James Binney
and
David Skinner


iv
This book is a consequence of the vision and muniﬁcence of
Walter of Merton, who in 1264 launched something good
Copyright c⃝2008–2013 James Binney and David Skinner
Published by Cappella Archive 2008; revised printings 2009, 2010, 2011


Contents
Preface
x
1
Probability and probability amplitudes
1
1.1 The laws of probability
3
• Expectation values 4
1.2 Probability amplitudes
5
• Two-slit interference 6
• Matter waves? 7
1.3 Quantum states
7
• Quantum amplitudes and measurements 7
⊲Complete sets of amplitudes 8
• Dirac notation 9
• Vector spaces and their adjoints 9
• The energy rep-
resentation 12
• Orientation of a spin-half particle 12
• Polarisation of photons 14
1.4 Measurement
15
Problems
15
2
Operators, measurement and time evolution
17
2.1 Operators
17
⊲Functions of operators 20
⊲Commutators 20
2.2 Evolution in time
21
• Evolution of expectation values 23
2.3 The position representation
24
• Hamiltonian of a particle 26
• Wavefunction for well
deﬁned momentum 27
⊲The uncertainty principle 28
• Dynamics of a free particle 29
• Back to two-slit in-
terference 31
• Generalisation to three dimensions 31
⊲Probability current 32
⊲The virial theorem 33
Problems
34
3
Harmonic oscillators and magnetic ﬁelds
37
3.1 Stationary states of a harmonic oscillator
37
3.2 Dynamics of oscillators
41
• Anharmonic oscillators 42
3.3 Motion in a magnetic ﬁeld
45
• Gauge transformations 46
• Landau Levels 47
⊲Displacement of the gyrocentre 49
• Aharonov-Bohm ef-
fect 51
Problems
52
4
Transformations & Observables
58
4.1 Transforming kets
58
• Translating kets 59
• Continuous transformations


vi
Contents
and generators 60
• The rotation operator 62
• Discrete transformations 62
⊲(a) The parity operator 62
⊲Mirror operators 63
4.2 Transformations of operators
64
⊲The parity operator 66
⊲Mirror operators 68
4.3 Symmetries and conservation laws
68
4.4 The Heisenberg picture
70
4.5 What is the essence of quantum mechanics?
71
Problems
73
5
Motion in step potentials
75
5.1 Square potential well
75
• Limiting cases 78
⊲(a) Inﬁnitely deep well 78
⊲(b) Inﬁnitely narrow well 78
5.2 A pair of square wells
79
• Ammonia 81
⊲The ammonia maser 83
5.3 Scattering of free particles
84
⊲The scattering cross section 86
• Tunnelling through a
potential barrier 87
• Scattering by a classically allowed
region 88
• Resonant scattering 89
⊲The Breit–Wigner
cross section 92
5.4 How applicable are our results?
95
5.5 Summary
98
Problems
99
6
Composite systems
104
6.1 Composite systems
105
• Collapse of the wavefunction 108
• Operators for com-
posite systems 109
• Development of entanglement 110
• Einstein–Podolski–Rosen experiment 111
⊲Bell’s inequality 113
6.2 Quantum computing
116
6.3 The density operator
121
• Reduced density operators 125
• Shannon entropy 127
6.4 Thermodynamics
129
6.5 Measurement
132
Problems
135
7
Angular Momentum
139
7.1 Eigenvalues of Jz and J2
139
• Rotation spectra of diatomic molecules 142
7.2 Orbital angular momentum
145
• L as the generator of circular translations 146
• Spectra
of L2 and Lz 147
• Orbital angular momentum eigenfunc-
tions 147
• Orbital angular momentum and parity 151
• Orbital angular momentum and kinetic energy 151
• Legendre polynomials 153
7.3 Three-dimensional harmonic oscillator
154
7.4 Spin angular momentum
158
• Spin and orientation 159
• Spin-half systems 161
⊲The
Stern–Gerlach experiment 161
• Spin-one systems 164
• The classical limit 165
• Precession in a magnetic ﬁeld 168


Contents
vii
7.5 Addition of angular momenta
169
• Case of two spin-half systems 173
• Case of spin one and
spin half 174
• The classical limit 175
Problems
176
8
Hydrogen
181
8.1 Gross structure of hydrogen
182
• Emission-line spectra 186
• Radial eigenfunctions 186
• Shielding 190
• Expectation values for r−k 192
8.2 Fine structure and beyond
193
• Spin-orbit coupling 194
• Hyperﬁne structure 197
Problems
199
9
Perturbation theory
203
9.1 Time-independent perturbations
203
• Quadratic Stark eﬀect 205
• Linear Stark eﬀect and
degenerate perturbation theory 206
• Eﬀect of an ex-
ternal magnetic ﬁeld 208
⊲Paschen–Back eﬀect 210
⊲Zeeman eﬀect 210
9.2 Variational principle
212
9.3 Time-dependent perturbation theory
213
• Fermi golden rule 214
• Radiative transition rates 215
• Selection rules 219
Problems
220
10 Helium and the periodic table
226
10.1 Identical particles
226
⊲Generalisation to the case of N identical particles 227
• Pauli exclusion principle 227
• Electron pairs 229
10.2 Gross structure of helium
230
• Gross structure from perturbation theory 231
• Application of the variational principle to he-
lium 232
• Excited states of helium 233
• Electronic conﬁgurations and spectroscopic terms 236
⊲Spectrum of helium 237
10.3 The periodic table
237
• From lithium to argon 237
• The fourth and ﬁfth peri-
ods 241
Problems
242
11 Adiabatic principle
244
11.1 Derivation of the adiabatic principle
245
11.2 Application to kinetic theory
246
11.3 Application to thermodynamics
248
11.4 The compressibility of condensed matter
249
11.5 Covalent bonding
250
• A model of a covalent bond 250
• Molecular dynamics 252
• Dissociation of molecules 253
11.6 The WKBJ approximation
253
Problems
255


viii
Contents
12 Scattering Theory
257
12.1 The scattering operator
257
• Perturbative treatment of the scattering operator 259
12.2 The S-matrix
261
• The iǫ prescription 261
• Expanding the S-matrix 263
• The scattering amplitude 265
12.3 Cross-sections and scattering experiments
267
• The optical theorem 269
12.4 Scattering electrons oﬀhydrogen
271
12.5 Partial wave expansions
273
• Scattering at low energy 276
12.6 Resonant scattering
278
• Breit–Wigner resonances 280
• Radioactive decay 280
Problems
282
Appendices
A
The laws of probability
285
B
Cartesian tensors
286
C
Fourier series and transforms
288
D
Operators in classical statistical mechanics
289
E
Lie groups and Lie algebras
291
F
The hidden symmetry of hydrogen
292
G
Lorentz covariant equations
294
H
Thomas precession
297
I
Matrix elements for a dipole-dipole interaction
299
J
Selection rule for j
300
K
Restrictions on scattering potentials
301
Index
303


Preface
This book is the fruit of for many years teaching the introduction to quan-
tum mechanics to second-year students of physics at Oxford University. We
have tried to convey to students that it is the use of probability amplitudes
rather than probabilities that makes quantum mechanics the extraordinary
thing that it is, and to grasp that the theory’s mathematical structure follows
almost inevitably from the concept of a probability amplitude. We have also
tried to explain how classical mechanics emerges from quantum mechanics.
Classical mechanics is about movement and change, while the strong empha-
sis on stationary states in traditional quantum courses makes the quantum
world seem static and irreconcilably diﬀerent from the world of every-day
experience and intuition. By stressing that stationary states are merely the
tool we use to solve the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation, and presenting
plenty of examples of how interference between stationary states gives rise
to familiar dynamics, we have tried to pull the quantum and classical worlds
into alignment, and to help students to extend their physical intuition into
the quantum domain.
Traditional courses use only the position representation.
If you step
back from the position representation, it becomes easier to explain that the
familiar operators have a dual role: on the one hand they are repositories of
information about the physical characteristics of the associated observable,
and on the other hand they are the generators of the fundamental symmetries
of space and time. These symmetries are crucial for, as we show already in
Chapter 4, they dictate the canonical commutation relations, from which
much follows.
Another advantage of down-playing the position representation is that it
becomes more natural to solve eigenvalue problems by operator methods than
by invoking Frobenius’ method for solving diﬀerential equations in series. A
careful presentation of Frobenius’ method is both time-consuming and rather
dull. The job is routinely bodged to the extent that it is only demonstrated
that in certain circumstances a series solution can be found, whereas in
quantum mechanics we need assurance that all solutions can be found by this
method, which is a priori implausible. We solve all the eigenvalue problems
we encounter by rigorous operator methods and dispense with solution in
series.
By introducing the angular momentum operators outside the position
representation, we give them an existence independent of the orbital angular-
momentum operators, and thus reduce the mystery that often surrounds
spin. We have tried hard to be clear and rigorous in our discussions of the
connection between a body’s spin and its orientation, and the implications of
spin for exchange symmetry. We treat hydrogen in fair detail, helium at the
level of gross structure only, and restrict our treatment of other atoms to an
explanation of how quantum mechanics explains the main trends of atomic
properties as one proceeds down the periodic table. Many-electron atoms
are extremely complex systems that cannot be treated in a ﬁrst course with
a level of rigour with which we are comfortable.
Scattering theory is of enormous practical importance and raises some
tricky conceptual questions. Chapter 5 on motion in one-dimensional step
potentials introduces many of the key concepts, such as the connection be-
tween phase shifts and the scattering cross section and how and why in
resonant scattering sensitive dependence of phases shifts on energy gives rise
to sharp peaks in the scattering cross section. In Chapter 12 we discuss fully
three-dimensional scattering in terms of the S-matrix and partial waves.
In most branches of physics it is impossible in a ﬁrst course to bring
students to the frontier of human understanding. We are fortunate in be-
ing able to do this already in Chapter 6, which introduces entanglement and


Preface
xi
quantum computing, and closes with a discussion of the still unresolved prob-
lem of measurement. Chapter 6 also demonstrates that thermodynamics is
a straightforward consequence of quantum mechanics and that we no longer
need to derive the laws of thermodynamics through the traditional, rather
subtle, arguments about heat engines.
We assume familiarity with complex numbers, including de Moivre’s
theorem, and familiarity with ﬁrst-order linear ordinary diﬀerential equa-
tions. We assume basic familiarity with vector calculus and matrix algebra.
We introduce the theory of abstract linear algebra to the level we require
from scratch. Appendices contain compact introductions to tensor notation,
Fourier series and transforms, and Lorentz covariance.
Every chapter concludes with an extensive list of problems for which
solutions are available. The solutions to problems marked with an asterisk,
which tend to be the harder problems, are available online1 and solutions to
other problems are available to colleagues who are teaching a course from the
book. In nearly every problem a student will either prove a useful result or
deepen his/her understanding of quantum mechanics and what it says about
the material world. Even after successfully solving a problem we suspect
students will ﬁnd it instructive and thought-provoking to study the solution
posted on the web.
We are grateful to several colleagues for comments on the ﬁrst two edi-
tions, particularly Justin Wark for alerting us to the problem with the singlet-
triplet splitting. Fabian Essler, Andre Lukas, John March-Russell and Laszlo
Solymar made several constructive suggestions. We thank Artur Ekert for
stimulating discussions of material covered in Chapter 6 and for reading that
chapter in draft form.
June 2012
James Binney
David Skinner
1 http://www-thphys.physics.ox.ac.uk/people/JamesBinney/QBhome.htm


1
Probability and probability
amplitudes
The future is always uncertain. Will it rain tomorrow? Will Pretty Lady win
the 4.20 race at Sandown Park on Tuesday? Will the Financial Times All
Shares index rise by more than 50 points in the next two months? Nobody
knows the answers to such questions, but in each case we may have infor-
mation that makes a positive answer more or less appropriate: if we are in
the Great Australian Desert and it’s winter, it is exceedingly unlikely to rain
tomorrow, but if we are in Delhi in the middle of the monsoon, it will almost
certainly rain. If Pretty Lady is getting on in years and hasn’t won a race yet,
she’s unlikely to win on Tuesday either, while if she recently won a couple of
major races and she’s looking ﬁt, she may well win at Sandown Park. The
performance of the All Shares index is hard to predict, but factors aﬀecting
company proﬁtability and the direction interest rates will move, will make
the index more or less likely to rise. Probability is a concept which enables
us to quantify and manipulate uncertainties. We assign a probability p = 0
to an event if we think it is simply impossible, and we assign p = 1 if we
think the event is certain to happen. Intermediate values for p imply that
we think an event may happen and may not, the value of p increasing with
our conﬁdence that it will happen.
Physics is about predicting the future.
Will this ladder slip when I
step on it?
How many times will this pendulum swing to and fro in an
hour? What temperature will the water in this thermos be at when it has
completely melted this ice cube? Physics often enables us to answer such
questions with a satisfying degree of certainty: the ladder will not slip pro-
vided it is inclined at less than 23.34◦to the vertical; the pendulum makes
3602 oscillations per hour; the water will reach 6.43◦C. But if we are pressed
for suﬃcient accuracy we must admit to uncertainty and resort to probability
because our predictions depend on the data we have, and these are always
subject to measuring error, and idealisations: the ladder’s critical angle de-
pends on the coeﬃcients of friction at the two ends of the ladder, and these
cannot be precisely given because both the wall and the ﬂoor are slightly
irregular surfaces; the period of the pendulum depends slightly on the am-
plitude of its swing, which will vary with temperature and the humidity of
the air; the ﬁnal temperature of the water will vary with the amount of heat
transferred through the walls of the thermos and the speed of evaporation


2
Chapter 1: Probability and probability amplitudes
from the water’s surface, which depends on draughts in the room as well as
on humidity. If we are asked to make predictions about a ladder that is in-
clined near its critical angle, or we need to know a quantity like the period of
the pendulum to high accuracy, we cannot make deﬁnite statements, we can
only say something like the probability of the ladder slipping is 0.8, or there
is a probability of 0.5 that the period of the pendulum lies between 1.0007 s
and 1.0004 s. We can dispense with probability when slightly vague answers
are permissible, such as that the period is 1.00 s to three signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
The concept of probability enables us to push our science to its limits, and
make the most precise and reliable statements possible.
Probability enters physics in two ways: through uncertain data and
through the system being subject to random inﬂuences. In the ﬁrst case we
could make a more accurate prediction if a property of the system, such as the
length or temperature of the pendulum, were more precisely characterised.
That is, the value of some number is well deﬁned, it’s just that we don’t
know the value very accurately. The second case is that in which our system
is subject to inherently random inﬂuences – for example, to the draughts
that make us uncertain what will be the ﬁnal temperature of the water.
To attain greater certainty when the system under study is subject to such
random inﬂuences, we can either take steps to increase the isolation of our
system – for example by putting a lid on the thermos – or we can expand the
system under study so that the formerly random inﬂuences become calculable
interactions between one part of the system and another. Such expansion
of the system is not a practical proposition in the case of the thermos – the
expanded system would have to encompass the air in the room, and then
we would worry about ﬂuctuations in the intensity of sunlight through the
window, draughts under the door and much else. The strategy does work
in other cases, however.
For example, climate changes over the last ten
million years can be studied as the response of a complex dynamical system
– the atmosphere coupled to the oceans – that is subject to random external
stimuli, but a more complete account of climate changes can be made when
the dynamical system is expanded to include the Sun and Moon because
climate is strongly aﬀected by the inclination of the Earth’s spin axis to the
plane of the Earth’s orbit and the Sun’s coronal activity.
A low-mass system is less likely to be well isolated from its surroundings
than a massive one. For example, the orbit of the Earth is scarcely aﬀected
by radiation pressure that sunlight exerts on it, while dust grains less than a
few microns in size that are in orbit about the Sun lose angular momentum
through radiation pressure at a rate that causes them to spiral in from near
the Earth to the Sun within a few millennia. Similarly, a rubber duck left
in the bath after the children have got out will stay very still, while tiny
pollen grains in the water near it execute Brownian motion that carries
them along a jerky path many times their own length each minute. Given
the diﬃculty of isolating low-mass systems, and the tremendous obstacles
that have to be surmounted if we are to expand the system to the point at
which all inﬂuences on the object of interest become causal, it is natural that
the physics of small systems is invariably probabilistic in nature. Quantum
mechanics describes the dynamics of all systems, great and small. Rather
than making ﬁrm predictions, it enables us to calculate probabilities. If the
system is massive, the probabilities of interest may be so near zero or unity
that we have eﬀective certainty.
If the system is small, the probabilistic
aspect of the theory will be more evident.
The scale of atoms is precisely the scale on which the probabilistic aspect
is predominant. Its predominance reﬂects two facts. First, there is no such
thing as an isolated atom because all atoms are inherently coupled to the
electromagnetic ﬁeld, and to the ﬁelds associated with electrons, neutrinos,
quarks, and various ‘gauge bosons’. Since we have incomplete information
about the states of these ﬁelds, we cannot hope to make precise predictions
about the behaviour of an individual atom. Second, we cannot build mea-
suring instruments of arbitrary delicacy. The instruments we use to measure


1.1 The laws of probability
3
atoms are usually themselves made of atoms, and employ electrons or pho-
tons that carry suﬃcient energy to change an atom signiﬁcantly. We rarely
know the exact state that our measuring instrument is in before we bring it
into contact with the system we have measured, so the result of the measure-
ment of the atom would be uncertain even if we knew the precise state that
the atom was in before we measured it, which of course we do not. More-
over, the act of measurement inevitably disturbs the atom, and leaves it in a
diﬀerent state from the one it was in before we made the measurement. On
account of the uncertainty inherent in the measuring process, we cannot be
sure what this ﬁnal state may be. Quantum mechanics allows us to calculate
probabilities for each possible ﬁnal state. Perhaps surprisingly, from the the-
ory it emerges that even when we have the most complete information about
the state of a system that is is logically possible to have, the outcomes of
some measurements remain uncertain. Thus whereas in the classical world
uncertainties can be made as small as we please by suﬃciently careful work,
in the quantum world uncertainty is woven into the fabric of reality.
1.1 The laws of probability
Events are frequently one-oﬀs: Pretty Lady will run in the 4.20 at Sandown
Park only once this year, and if she enters the race next year, her form and
the ﬁeld will be diﬀerent. The probability that we want is for this year’s
race. Sometimes events can be repeated, however. For example, there is
no obvious diﬀerence between one throw of a die and the next throw, so
it makes sense to assume that the probability of throwing a 5 is the same
on each throw. When events can be repeated in this way we seek to assign
probabilities in such a way that when we make a very large number N of
trials, the number nA of trials in which event A occurs (for example 5 comes
up) satisﬁes
nA ≃pAN.
(1.1)
In any realistic sequence of throws, the ratio nA/N will vary with N, while
the probability pA does not. So the relation (1.1) is rarely an equality. The
idea is that we should choose pA so that nA/N ﬂuctuates in a smaller and
smaller interval around pA as N is increased.
Events can be logically combined to form composite events: if A is the
event that a certain red die falls with 1 up, and B is the event that a white
die falls with 5 up, AB is the event that when both dice are thrown, the red
die shows 1 and the white one shows 5. If the probability of A is pA and the
probability of B is pB, then in a fraction ∼pA of throws of the two dice the
red die will show 1, and in a fraction ∼pB of these throws, the white die
will have 5 up. Hence the fraction of throws in which the event AB occurs is
∼pApB so we should take the probability of AB to be pAB = pApB. In this
example A and B are independent events because we see no reason why
the number shown by the white die could be inﬂuenced by the number that
happens to come up on the red one, and vice versa. The rule for combining
the probabilities of independent events to get the probability of both events
happening, is to multiply them:
p(A and B) = p(A)p(B)
(independent events).
(1.2)
Since only one number can come up on a die in a given throw, the
event A above excludes the event C that the red die shows 2; A and C are
exclusive events. The probability that either a 1 or a 2 will show is obtained
by adding pA and pC. Thus
p(A or C) = p(A) + p(C)
(exclusive events).
(1.3)
In the case of reproducible events, this rule is clearly consistent with the
principle that the fraction of trials in which either A or C occurs should be


4
Chapter 1: Probability and probability amplitudes
the sum of the fractions of the trials in which one or the other occurs. If
we throw our die, the number that will come up is certainly one of 1, 2, 3,
4, 5 or 6. So by the rule just given, the sum of the probabilities associated
with each of these numbers coming up has to be unity. Unless we know that
the die is loaded, we assume that no number is more likely to come up than
another, so all six probabilities must be equal. Hence, they must all equal
1
6. Generalising this example we have the rules
With just N mutually exclusive outcomes,
N
X
i=1
pi = 1.
If all outcomes are equally likely, pi = 1/N.
(1.4)
1.1.1 Expectation values
A random variable x is a quantity that we can measure and the value that
we get is subject to uncertainty. Suppose for simplicity that only discrete
values xi can be measured. In the case of a die, for example, x could be the
number that comes up, so x has six possible values, x1 = 1 to x6 = 6. If pi
is the probability that we shall measure xi, then the expectation value of
x is
⟨x⟩≡
X
i
pixi.
(1.5)
If the event is reproducible, it is easy to show that the average of the values
that we measure on N trials tends to ⟨x⟩as N becomes very large. Conse-
quently, ⟨x⟩is often referred to as the average of x.
Suppose we have two random variables, x and y. Let pij be the proba-
bility that our measurement returns xi for the value of x and yj for the value
of y. Then the expectation of the sum x + y is
⟨x + y⟩=
X
ij
pij(xi + yj) =
X
ij
pijxi +
X
ij
pijyj
(1.6)
But P
j pij is the probability that we measure xi regardless of what we
measure for y, so it must equal pi. Similarly P
i pij = pj, the probability of
measuring yj irrespective of what we get for x. Inserting these expressions
in to (1.6) we ﬁnd
⟨x + y⟩= ⟨x⟩+ ⟨y⟩.
(1.7)
That is, the expectation value of the sum of two random variables is the
sum of the variables’ individual expectation values, regardless of whether
the variables are independent or not.
A useful measure of the amount by which the value of a random variable
ﬂuctuates from trial to trial is the variance of x:

(x −⟨x⟩)2
=

x2
−2 ⟨x ⟨x⟩⟩+
D
⟨x⟩2E
,
(1.8)
where we have made use of equation (1.7). The expectation ⟨x⟩is not a
random variable, but has a deﬁnite value. Consequently ⟨x ⟨x⟩⟩= ⟨x⟩2 and
D
⟨x⟩2E
= ⟨x⟩2, so the variance of x is related to the expectations of x and
x2 by

∆2
x

≡

(x −⟨x⟩)2
=

x2
−⟨x⟩2 .
(1.9)


1.2 Probability amplitudes
5
Figure 1.1 The two-slit interference experiment.
1.2 Probability amplitudes
Many branches of the social, physical and medical sciences make extensive
use of probabilities, but quantum mechanics stands alone in the way that it
calculates probabilities, for it always evaluates a probability p as the mod-
square of a certain complex number A:
p = |A|2.
(1.10)
The complex number A is called the probability amplitude for p.
Quantum mechanics is the only branch of knowledge in which proba-
bility amplitudes appear, and nobody understands why they arise. They
give rise to phenomena that have no analogues in classical physics through
the following fundamental principle. Suppose something can happen by two
(mutually exclusive) routes, S or T , and let the probability amplitude for it
to happen by route S be A(S) and the probability amplitude for it to happen
by route T be A(T ). Then the probability amplitude for it to happen by one
route or the other is
A(S or T) = A(S) + A(T ).
(1.11)
This rule takes the place of the sum rule for probabilities, equation (1.3).
However, it is incompatible with equation (1.3), because it implies that the
probability that the event happens regardless of route is
p(S or T) = |A(S or T)|2 = |A(S) + A(T )|2
= |A(S)|2 + A(S)A∗(T ) + A∗(S)A(T ) + |A(T )|2
= p(S) + p(T ) + 2ℜe(A(S)A∗(T )).
(1.12)
That is, the probability that an event will happen is not merely the sum
of the probabilities that it will happen by each of the two possible routes:
there is an additional term 2ℜe(A(S)A∗(T )). This term has no counterpart
in standard probability theory, and violates the fundamental rule (1.3) of
probability theory. It depends on the phases of the probability amplitudes
for the individual routes, which do not contribute to the probabilities p(S) =
|A(S)|2 of the routes.
Whenever the probability of an event diﬀers from the sum of the prob-
abilities associated with the various mutually exclusive routes by which it
can happen, we say we have a manifestation of quantum interference.
The term 2ℜe(A(S)A∗(T )) in equation (1.12) is what generates quantum
interference mathematically. We shall see that in certain circumstances the
violations of equation (1.3) that are caused by quantum interference are not
detectable, so standard probability theory appears to be valid.
How do we know that the principle (1.11), which has these extraordinary
consequences, is true?
The soundest answer is that it is a fundamental
postulate of quantum mechanics, and that every time you look at a digital
watch, or touch a computer keyboard, or listen to a CD player, or interact
with any other electronic device that has been engineered with the help
of quantum mechanics, you are testing and vindicating this theory.
Our
civilisation now quite simply depends on the validity of equation (1.11).


6
Chapter 1: Probability and probability amplitudes
Figure 1.2 The probability distribu-
tions of passing through each of the
two closely spaced slits overlap.
1.2.1 Two-slit interference
An imaginary experiment will clarify the physical implications of the prin-
ciple and suggest how it might be tested experimentally.
The apparatus
consists of an electron gun, G, a screen with two narrow slits S1 and S2,
and a photographic plate P, which darkens when hit by an electron (see
Figure 1.1).
When an electron is emitted by G, it has an amplitude to pass through
slit S1 and then hit the screen at the point x. This amplitude will clearly
depend on the point x, so we label it A1(x). Similarly, there is an amplitude
A2(x) that the electron passed through S2 before reaching the screen at x.
Hence the probability that the electron arrives at x is
P(x) = |A1(x) + A2(x)|2 = |A1(x)|2 + |A2(x)|2 + 2ℜe(A1(x)A∗
2(x)). (1.13)
|A1(x)|2 is simply the probability that the electron reaches the plate after
passing through S1. We expect this to be a roughly Gaussian distribution
p1(x) that is centred on the value x1 of x at which a straight line from G
through the middle of S1 hits the plate. |A2(x)|2 should similarly be a roughly
Gaussian function p2(x) centred on the intersection at x2 of the screen and
the straight line from G through the middle of S2. It is convenient to write
Ai = |Ai|eiφi = √pieiφi, where φi is the phase of the complex number Ai.
Then equation (1.13) can be written
p(x) = p1(x) + p2(x) + I(x),
(1.14a)
where the interference term I is
I(x) = 2
p
p1(x)p2(x) cos(φ1(x) −φ2(x)).
(1.14b)
Consider the behaviour of I(x) near the point that is equidistant from the
slits. Then (see Figure 1.2) p1 ≃p2 and the interference term is comparable
in magnitude to p1 + p2, and, by equations (1.14), the probability of an
electron arriving at x will oscillate between ∼2p1 and 0 depending on the
value of the phase diﬀerence φ1(x) −φ2(x). In §2.3.4 we shall show that the
phases φi(x) are approximately linear functions of x, so after many electrons
have been ﬁred from G to P in succession, the blackening of P at x, which
will be roughly proportional to the number of electrons that have arrived at
x, will show a sinusoidal pattern.
Let’s replace the electrons by machine-gun bullets. Then everyday ex-
perience tells us that classical physics applies, and it predicts that the prob-
ability p(x) of a bullet arriving at x is just the sum p1(x) + p2(x) of the
probabilities of a bullet coming through S1 or S2. Hence classical physics
does not predict a sinusoidal pattern in p(x). How do we reconcile the very
diﬀerent predictions of classical and quantum mechanics? Firearms manufac-
turers have for centuries used classical mechanics with deadly success, so is


1.3 Quantum states
7
the resolution that bullets do not obey quantum mechanics? We believe they
do, and the probability distribution for the arrival of bullets should show a
sinusoidal pattern. However, in §2.3.4 we shall ﬁnd that quantum mechanics
predicts that the distance ∆between the peaks and troughs of this pattern
becomes smaller and smaller as we increase the mass of the particles we are
ﬁring through the slits, and by the time the particles are as massive as a
bullet, ∆is fantastically small ∼10−29 m. Consequently, it is not exper-
imentally feasible to test whether p(x) becomes small at regular intervals.
Any feasible experiment will probe the value of p(x) averaged over many
peaks and troughs of the sinusoidal pattern. This averaged value of p(x)
agrees with the probability distribution we derive from classical mechanics
because the average value of I(x) in equation (1.14) vanishes.
1.2.2 Matter waves?
The sinusoidal pattern of blackening on P that quantum mechanics predicts
proves to be identical to the interference pattern that is observed in Young’s
double-slit experiment. This experiment established that light is a wave phe-
nomenon because the wave theory could readily explain the existence of the
interference pattern. It is natural to infer from the existence of the sinusoidal
pattern in the quantum-mechanical case, that particles are manifestations of
waves in some medium. There is much truth in this inference, and at an
advanced level this idea is embodied in quantum ﬁeld theory. However, in
the present context of non-relativistic quantum mechanics, the concept of
matter waves is unhelpful. Particles are particles, not waves, and they pass
through one slit or the other. The sinusoidal pattern arises because proba-
bility amplitudes are complex numbers, which add in the same way as wave
amplitudes. Moreover, the energy density (intensity) associated with a wave
is proportional to the mod square of the wave amplitude, just as the proba-
bility density of ﬁnding a particle is proportional to the mod square of the
probability amplitude. Hence, on a mathematical level, there is a one-to-one
correspondence between what happens when particles are ﬁred towards a
pair of slits and when light diﬀracts through similar slits. But we cannot
consistently infer from this correspondence that particles are manifestations
of waves because quantum interference occurs in quantum systems that are
much more complex than a single particle, and indeed in contexts where
motion through space plays no role. In such contexts we cannot ascribe the
interference phenomenon to interference between real physical waves, so it is
inconsistent to take this step in the case of single-particle mechanics.
1.3 Quantum states
1.3.1 Quantum amplitudes and measurements
Physics is about the quantitative description of natural phenomena. A quan-
titative description of a system inevitably starts by deﬁning ways in which
it can be measured. If the system is a single particle, quantities that we can
measure are its x, y and z coordinates with respect to some choice of axes,
and the components of its momentum parallel to these axes. We can also
measure its energy, and its angular momentum. The more complex a system
is, the more ways there will be in which we can measure it.
Associated with every measurement, there will be a set of possible nu-
merical values for the measurement – the spectrum of the measurement.
For example, the spectrum of the x coordinate of a particle in empty space
is the interval (−∞, ∞), while the spectrum of its kinetic energy is (0, ∞).
We shall encounter cases in which the spectrum of a measurement con-
sists of discrete values.
For example, in Chapter 7 we shall show that
the angular momentum of a particle parallel to any given axis has spec-
trum (. . . , (k −1)¯h, k¯h, (k + 1)¯h, . . .), where ¯h is Planck’s constant h =


8
Chapter 1: Probability and probability amplitudes
6.63 × 10−34 J s divided by 2π, and k is either 0 or 1
2. When the spectrum is
a set of discrete numbers, we say that those numbers are the allowed values
of the measurement.
With every value in the spectrum of a given measurement there will be
a quantum amplitude that we will ﬁnd this value if we make the relevant
measurement. Quantum mechanics is the science of how to calculate such
amplitudes given the results of a suﬃcient number of prior measurements.
Imagine that you’re investigating some physical system: some particles
in an ion trap, a drop of liquid helium, the electromagnetic ﬁeld in a resonant
cavity. What do you know about the state of this system? You have two types
of knowledge: (1) a speciﬁcation of the physical nature of the system (e.g.,
size & shape of the resonant cavity), and (2) information about the current
dynamical state of the system. In quantum mechanics information of type
(1) is used to deﬁne an object called the Hamiltonian H of the system that
is deﬁned by equation (2.5) below. Information of type (2) is more subtle.
It must consist of predictions for the outcomes of measurements you could
make on the system. Since these outcomes are inherently uncertain, your
information must relate to the probabilities of diﬀerent outcomes, and in the
simplest case consists of values for the relevant probability amplitudes. For
example, your knowledge might consist of amplitudes for the various possible
outcomes of a measurement of energy, or of a measurement of momentum.
In quantum mechanics, then, knowledge about the current dynamical
state of a system is embodied in a set of quantum amplitudes. In classical
physics, by contrast, we can state with certainty which value we will measure,
and we characterise the system’s current dynamical state by simply giving
this value. Such values are often called ‘coordinates’ of the system. Thus
in quantum mechanics a whole set of quantum amplitudes replaces a single
number.
Complete sets of amplitudes
Given the amplitudes for a certain set of
events, it is often possible to calculate amplitudes for other events. The phe-
nomenon of particle spin provides the neatest illustration of this statement.
Electrons, protons, neutrinos, quarks, and many other elementary par-
ticles turn out to be tiny gyroscopes: they spin. The rate at which they
spin and therefore the the magnitude of their spin angular momentum never
changes; it is always
p
3/4¯h. Particles with this amount of spin are called
spin-half particles for reasons that will emerge shortly. Although the spin
of a spin-half particle is ﬁxed in magnitude, its direction can change. Conse-
quently, the value of the spin angular momentum parallel to any given axis
can take diﬀerent values. In §7.4.2 we shall show that parallel to any given
axis, the spin angular momentum of a spin-half particle can be either ± 1
2¯h.
Consequently, the spin parallel to the z axis is denoted sz¯h, where sz = ± 1
2
is an observable with the spectrum {−1
2, 1
2}.
In §7.4.2 we shall show that if we know both the amplitude a+ that sz
will be measured to be + 1
2 and the amplitude a−that a measurement will
yield sz = −1
2, then we can calculate from these two complex numbers the
amplitudes b+ and b−for the two possible outcomes of the measurement of
the spin along any direction. If we know only a+ (or only a−), then we can
calculate neither b+ nor b−for any other direction.
Generalising from this example, we have the concept of a complete
set of amplitudes: the set contains enough information to enable one
to calculate amplitudes for the outcome of any measurement whatsoever.
Hence, such a set gives a complete speciﬁcation of the physical state of the
system. A complete set of amplitudes is generally understood to be a minimal
set in the sense that none of the amplitudes can be calculated from the others.
The set {a−, a+} constitutes a complete set of amplitudes for the spin of an
electron.


1.3 Quantum states
9
1.3.2 Dirac notation
Dirac introduced the symbol |ψ⟩, pronounced ‘ket psi’, to denote a complete
set of amplitudes for the system. If the system consists of a particle1 trapped
in a potential well, |ψ⟩could consist of the amplitudes an that the energy
is En, where (E1, E2, . . .) is the spectrum of possible energies, or it might
consist of the amplitudes ψ(x) that the particle is found at x, or it might
consist of the amplitudes a(p) that the momentum is measured to be p.
Using the abstract symbol |ψ⟩enables us to think about the system without
committing ourselves to what complete set of amplitudes we are going to
use, in the same way that the position vector x enables us to think about
a geometrical point independently of the coordinates (x, y, z), (r, θ, φ) or
whatever by which we locate it. That is, |ψ⟩is a container for a complete set
of amplitudes in the same way that a vector x is a container for a complete
set of coordinates.
The ket |ψ⟩encapsulates the crucial concept of a quantum state, which
is independent of the particular set of amplitudes that we choose to quantify
it, and is fundamental to several branches of physics.
We saw in the last section that amplitudes must sometimes be added: if
an outcome can be achieved by two diﬀerent routes and we do not monitor
the route by which it is achieved, we add the amplitudes associated with each
route to get the overall amplitude for the outcome. In view of this additivity,
we write
|ψ3⟩= |ψ1⟩+ |ψ2⟩
(1.15)
to mean that every amplitude in the complete set |ψ3⟩is the sum of the
corresponding amplitudes in the complete sets |ψ1⟩and |ψ2⟩. This rule is
exactly analogous to the rule for adding vectors because b3 = b1+b2 implies
that each component of b3 is the sum of the corresponding components of
b1 and b2.
Since amplitudes are complex numbers, for any complex number α we
can deﬁne
|ψ′⟩= α|ψ⟩
(1.16)
to mean that every amplitude in the set |ψ′⟩is α times the corresponding
amplitude in |ψ⟩. Again there is an obvious parallel in the case of vectors:
3b is the vector that has x component 3bx, etc.
1.3.3 Vector spaces and their adjoints
The analogy between kets and vectors proves extremely fruitful and is worth
developing. For a mathematician, objects, like kets, that you can add and
multiply by arbitrary complex numbers inhabit a vector space. Since we
live in a (three-dimensional) vector space, we have a strong intuitive feel for
the structures that arise in general vector spaces, and this intuition helps
us to understand problems that arise with kets. Unfortunately our every-
day experience does not prepare us for an important property of a general
vector space, namely the existence of an associated ‘adjoint’ space, because
the space adjoint to real three-dimensional space is indistinguishable from
real space. In quantum mechanics and in relativity the two spaces are dis-
tinguishable. We now take a moment to develop the mathematical theory
of general vector spaces in the context of kets in order to explain the re-
lationship between a general vector space and its adjoint space. When we
are merely using kets as examples of vectors, we shall call them “vectors”.
Appendix G explains how these ideas are relevant to relativity.
1 Most elementary particles have intrinsic angular momentum or ‘spin’ (§7.4). A com-
plete set of amplitudes for a particle such as electron or proton that has spin, includes
information about the orientation of the spin. In the interests of simplicity, in our discus-
sions particles are assumed to have no spin unless the contrary is explicitly stated, even
though spinless particles are rather rare.


10
Chapter 1: Probability and probability amplitudes
For any vector space V it is natural to choose a set of basis vectors,
that is, a set of vectors |i⟩that is large enough for it to be possible to
express any given vector |ψ⟩as a linear combination of the set’s members.
Speciﬁcally, for any ket |ψ⟩there are complex numbers ai such that
|ψ⟩=
X
i
ai|i⟩.
(1.17)
The set should be minimal in the sense that none of its members can be
expressed as a linear combination of the remaining ones. In the case of ordi-
nary three-dimensional space, basis vectors are provided by the unit vectors
i, j and k along the three coordinate axes, and any vector b can be expressed
as the sum b = a1i + a2j + a3k, which is the analogue of equation (1.17).
In quantum mechanics an important role is played by complex-valued
linear functions on the vector space V because these functions extract the
amplitude for something to happen given that the system is in the state |ψ⟩.
Let ⟨f| (pronounced ‘bra f’) be such a function. We denote by ⟨f|ψ⟩the
result of evaluating this function on the ket |ψ⟩. Hence, ⟨f|ψ⟩is a complex
number (a probability amplitude) that in the ordinary notation of functions
would be written f (|ψ⟩). The linearity of the function ⟨f| implies that for
any complex numbers α, β and kets |ψ⟩, |φ⟩, it is true that
⟨f|
 α|ψ⟩+ β|φ⟩

= α⟨f|ψ⟩+ β⟨f|φ⟩.
(1.18)
Notice that the right side of this equation is a sum of two products of complex
numbers, so it is well deﬁned.
To deﬁne a function on V we have only to give a rule that enables us
to evaluate the function on any vector in V . Hence we can deﬁne the sum
⟨h| ≡⟨f| + ⟨g| of two bras ⟨f| and ⟨g| by the rule
⟨h|ψ⟩= ⟨f|ψ⟩+ ⟨g|ψ⟩
(1.19)
Similarly, we deﬁne the bra ⟨p| ≡α⟨f| to be result of multiplying ⟨f| by
some complex number α through the rule
⟨p|ψ⟩= α⟨f|ψ⟩.
(1.20)
Since we now know what it means to add these functions and multiply them
by complex numbers, they form a vector space V ′, called the adjoint space
of V .
The dimension of a vector space is the number of vectors required to
make up a basis for the space. We now show that V and V ′ have the same
dimension. Let2 {|i⟩} for i = 1, N be a basis for V . Then a linear function
⟨f| on V is fully deﬁned once we have given the N numbers ⟨f|i⟩. To see
that this is true, we use (1.17) and the linearity of ⟨f| to calculate ⟨f|ψ⟩for
an arbitrary vector |ψ⟩= P
i ai|i⟩:
⟨f|ψ⟩=
N
X
i=1
ai⟨f|i⟩.
(1.21)
This result implies that we can deﬁne N functions ⟨j| (j = 1, N) through
the equations
⟨j|i⟩= δij,
(1.22)
where δij is 1 if i = j and zero otherwise, because these equations specify the
value that each bra ⟨j| takes on every basis vector |i⟩and therefore through
2 Throughout this book the notation {xi} means ‘the set of objects xi’.


1.3 Quantum states
11
(1.21) the value that ⟨j| takes on any vector |ψ⟩. Now consider the following
linear combination of these bras:
⟨F| ≡
N
X
j=1
⟨f|j⟩⟨j|.
(1.23)
It is trivial to check that for any i we have ⟨F|i⟩= ⟨f|i⟩, and from this
it follows that ⟨F| = ⟨f| because we have already agreed that a bra is fully
speciﬁed by the values it takes on the basis vectors. Since we have now shown
that any bra can be expressed as a linear combination of the N bras speciﬁed
by (1.22), and the latter are manifestly linearly independent, it follows that
the dimensionality of V ′ is N, the dimensionality of V .
In summary, we have established that every N-dimensional vector space
V comes with an N-dimensional space V ′ of linear functions on V , called the
adjoint space. Moreover, we have shown that once we have chosen a basis
{|i⟩} for V , there is an associated basis {⟨i|} for V ′. Equation (1.22) shows
that there is an intimate relation between the ket |i⟩and the bra ⟨i|: ⟨i|i⟩= 1
while ⟨j|i⟩= 0 for j̸ = i. We acknowledge this relationship by saying that ⟨i|
is the adjoint of |i⟩. We extend this deﬁnition of an adjoint to an arbitrary
ket |ψ⟩as follows: if
|ψ⟩=
X
i
ai|i⟩
then
⟨ψ| ≡
X
i
a∗
i ⟨i|.
(1.24)
With this choice, when we evaluate the function ⟨ψ| on the ket |ψ⟩we ﬁnd
⟨ψ|ψ⟩=
X
i
a∗
i ⟨i|
X
j
aj|j⟩

=
X
i
|ai|2 ≥0.
(1.25)
Thus for any state the number ⟨ψ|ψ⟩is real and non-negative, and it can
vanish only if |ψ⟩= 0 because every ai vanishes. We call this number the
length of |ψ⟩.
The components of an ordinary three-dimensional vector b = bxi +
byj + bzk are real.
Consequently, we evaluate the length-square of b as
simply (bxi + byj + bzk) · (bxi + byj + bzk) = b2
x + b2
y + b2
z. The vector on the
extreme left of this expression is strictly speaking the adjoint of b but it is
indistinguishable from it because we have not modiﬁed the components in
any way. In the quantum mechanical case eq. 1.25, the components of the
adjoint vector are complex conjugates of the components of the vector, so
the diﬀerence between a vector and its adjoint is manifest.
If |φ⟩= P
i bi|i⟩and |ψ⟩= P
i ai|i⟩are any two states, a calculation
analogous to that in equation (1.25) shows that
⟨φ|ψ⟩=
X
i
b∗
i ai.
(1.26)
Similarly, we can show that ⟨ψ|φ⟩= P
i a∗
i bi, and from this it follows that
⟨ψ|φ⟩=
 ⟨φ|ψ⟩
∗.
(1.27)
We shall make frequent use of this equation.
Equation (1.26) shows that there is a close connection between extract-
ing the complex number ⟨φ|ψ⟩from ⟨φ| and |ψ⟩and the operation of taking
the dot product between two vectors b and a.


12
Chapter 1: Probability and probability amplitudes
1.3.4 The energy representation
Suppose our system is a particle that is trapped in some potential well. Then
the spectrum of allowed energies will be a set of discrete numbers E0, E1, . . .
and a complete set of amplitudes are the amplitudes ai whose mod squares
give the probabilities pi of measuring the energy to be Ei. Let {|i⟩} be a set
of basis kets for the space V of the system’s quantum states. Then we use
the set of amplitudes ai to associate them with a ket |ψ⟩through
|ψ⟩=
X
i
ai|i⟩.
(1.28)
This equation relates a complete set of amplitudes {ai} to a certain ket
|ψ⟩. We discover the physical meaning of a particular basis ket, say |k⟩, by
examining the values that the expansion coeﬃcients ai take when we apply
equation (1.28) in the case |k⟩= |ψ⟩. We clearly then have that ai = 0 for
i̸ = k and ak = 1. Consequently, the quantum state |k⟩is that in which
we are certain to measure the value Ek for the energy. We say that |k⟩is
a state of well deﬁned energy. It will help us remember this important
identiﬁcation if we relabel the basis kets, writing |Ei⟩instead of just |i⟩, so
that (1.28) becomes
|ψ⟩=
X
i
ai|Ei⟩.
(1.29)
Suppose we multiply this equation through by ⟨Ek|. Then by the lin-
earity of this operation and the orthogonality relation (1.22) (which in our
new notation reads ⟨Ek|Ei⟩= δik) we ﬁnd
ak = ⟨Ek|ψ⟩.
(1.30)
This is an enormously important result because it tells us how to extract from
an arbitrary quantum state |ψ⟩the amplitude for ﬁnding that the energy is
Ek.
Equation (1.25) yields
⟨ψ|ψ⟩=
X
i
|ai|2 =
X
i
pi = 1,
(1.31)
where the last equality follows because if we measure the energy, we must
ﬁnd some value, so the probabilities pi must sum to unity. Thus kets that
describe real quantum states must have unit length: we call kets with unit
length properly normalised. During calculations we frequently encounter
kets that are not properly normalised, and it is important to remember that
the key rule (1.30) can be used to extract predictions only from properly
normalised kets. Fortunately, any ket |φ⟩= P
i bi|i⟩is readily normalised: it
is straightforward to check that
|ψ⟩≡
X
i
bi
p
⟨φ|φ⟩
|i⟩
(1.32)
is properly normalised regardless of the values of the bi.
1.3.5 Orientation of a spin-half particle
Formulae for the components of the spin angular momentum of a spin-half
particle that we shall derive in §7.4.2 provide a nice illustration of how the
abstract machinery just introduced enables us to predict the results of ex-
periments.
If you measure one component, say sz, of the spin s of an electron, you
will obtain one of two results, either sz = 1
2 or sz = −1
2. Moreover the state


1.3 Quantum states
13
|+⟩in which a measurement of sz is certain to yield 1
2 and the state |−⟩in
which the measurement is certain to yield −1
2 form a complete set of states
for the electron’s spin. That is, any state of spin can be expressed as a linear
combination of |+⟩and |−⟩:
|ψ⟩= a−|−⟩+ a+|+⟩.
(1.33)
Let n be the unit vector in the direction with polar coordinates (θ, φ).
Then the state |+, n⟩in which a measurement of the component of s along
n is certain to return 1
2 turns out to be (Problem 7.6)
|+, n⟩= sin(θ/2) eiφ/2|−⟩+ cos(θ/2) e−iφ/2|+⟩.
(1.34a)
Similarly the state |−, n⟩in which a measurement of the component of s
along n is certain to return −1
2 is
|−, n⟩= cos(θ/2) eiφ/2|−⟩−sin(θ/2) e−iφ/2|+⟩.
(1.34b)
By equation (1.24) the adjoints of these kets are the bras
⟨+, n| = sin(θ/2) e−iφ/2⟨−| + cos(θ/2) eiφ/2⟨+|
⟨−, n| = cos(θ/2) e−iφ/2⟨−| −sin(θ/2) eiφ/2⟨+|.
(1.35)
From these expressions it is easy to check that the kets |±, n⟩are properly
normalised and orthogonal to one another.
Suppose we have just measured sz and found the value to be 1
2 and we
want the amplitude A−(n) to ﬁnd −1
2 when we measure n·s. Then the state
of the system is |ψ⟩= |+⟩and the required amplitude is
A−(n) = ⟨−, n|ψ⟩= ⟨−, n|+⟩= −sin(θ/2)eiφ/2,
(1.36)
so the probability of this outcome is
P−(n) = |A−(n)|2 = sin2(θ/2).
(1.37)
This vanishes when θ = 0 as it should since then n = (0, 0, 1) so n · s = sz,
and we are guaranteed to ﬁnd sz = 1
2 rather than −1
2. P−(n) rises to 1
2 when
θ = π/2 and n lies somewhere in the x, y plane. In particular, if sz = 1
2, a
measurement of sx is equally likely to return either of the two possible values
± 1
2.
Putting θ = π/2, φ = 0 into equations (1.34) we obtain expressions for
the states in which the result of a measurement of sx is certain
|+, x⟩=
1
√2 (|−⟩+ |+⟩)
;
|−, x⟩=
1
√2 (|−⟩−|+⟩) .
(1.38)
Similarly, inserting θ = π/2, φ = π/2 we obtain the states in which the result
of measuring sy is certain
|+, y⟩= eiπ/4
√2 (|−⟩−i|+⟩)
;
|−, y⟩= eiπ/4
√2 (|−⟩+ i|+⟩) .
(1.39)
Notice that |+, x⟩and |+, y⟩are both states in which the probability of
measuring sz to be 1
2 is 1
2. What makes them physically distinct states is
that the ratio of the amplitudes to measure ± 1
2 for sz is unity in one case
and i in the other.


14
Chapter 1: Probability and probability amplitudes
1.3.6 Polarisation of photons
A discussion of the possible polarisations of a beam of light displays an
interesting connection between quantum amplitudes and classical physics.
At any instant in a polarised beam of light, the electric vector E is in one
particular direction perpendicular to the beam. In a plane-polarised beam,
the direction of E stays the same, while in a circularly polarised beam it
rotates. A sheet of Polaroid transmits the component of E in one direction
and blocks the perpendicular component. Consequently, in the transmitted
beam |E| is smaller than in the incident beam by a factor cos θ, where θ is
the angle between the incident ﬁeld and the direction in the Polaroid that
transmits the ﬁeld. Since the beam’s energy ﬂux is proportional to |E|2, a
fraction cos2 θ of the beam’s energy is transmitted by the Polaroid.
Individual photons either pass through the Polaroid intact or are ab-
sorbed by it depending on which quantum state they are found to be in
when they are ‘measured’ by the Polaroid. Let |→⟩be the state in which the
photon will be transmitted and |↑⟩that in which it will be blocked. Then
the photons of the incoming plane-polarised beam are in the state
|ψ⟩= cos θ|→⟩+ sin θ|↑⟩,
(1.40)
so each photon has an amplitude a→= cos θ for a measurement by the
Polaroid to ﬁnd it in the state |→⟩and be transmitted, and an amplitude
a↑= sin θ to be found to be in the state |↑⟩and be blocked. The fraction
of the beam’s photons that are transmitted is the probability get through
P→= |a→|2 = cos2 θ. Consequently a fraction cos2 θ of the incident energy
is transmitted, in agreement with classical physics.
The states |→⟩and |↑⟩form a complete set of states for photons that
move in the direction of the beam. An alternative complete set of states is
the set {|+⟩, |−⟩} formed by the state |+⟩of a right-hand circularly polarised
photon and the state |−⟩of a left-hand circularly polarised photon. In the
laboratory a circularly polarised beam is often formed by passing a plane
polarised beam through a birefringent material such as calcite that has its
axes aligned at 45◦to the incoming plane of polarisation. The incoming
beam is resolved into its components parallel to the calcite’s axes, and one
component is shifted in phase by π/2 with respect to the other. In terms of
unit vectors ˆex and ˆey parallel to the calcite’s axes, the incoming ﬁeld is
E = E
√2ℜ

(ˆex + ˆey)e−iωt	
(1.41)
and the outgoing ﬁeld of a left-hand polarised beam is
E−= E
√2ℜ

(ˆex + iˆey)e−iωt	
,
(1.42a)
while the ﬁeld of a right-hand polarised beam would be
E+ = E
√2ℜ

(ˆex −iˆey)e−iωt	
.
(1.42b)
The last two equations express the electric ﬁeld of a circularly polarised
beam as a linear combination of plane polarised beams that diﬀer in phase.
Conversely, by adding (1.42b) to equation (1.42a), we can express the electric
ﬁeld of a beam polarised along the x axis as a linear combination of the ﬁelds
of two circularly-polarised beams.
Similarly, the quantum state of a circularly polarised photon is a linear
superposition of linearly-polarised quantum states:
|±⟩=
1
√2 (|→⟩∓i|↑⟩) ,
(1.43)


Problems
15
and conversely, a state of linear polarisation is a linear superposition of states
of circular polarisation:
|→⟩=
1
√2 (|+⟩+ |−⟩) .
(1.44)
Whereas in classical physics complex numbers are just a convenient way of
representing the real function cos(ωt + φ) for arbitrary phase φ, quantum
amplitudes are inherently complex and the operator ℜis not used. Whereas
in classical physics a beam may be linearly polarised in a particular direction,
or circularly polarised in a given sense, in quantum mechanics an individual
photon has an amplitude to be linearly polarised in a any chosen direction
and an amplitude to be circularly polarised in a given sense. The amplitude
to be linearly polarised may vanish in one particular direction, or it may
vanish for one sense of circular polarisation. In the general case the photon
will have a non-vanishing amplitude to be polarised in any direction and any
sense. After it has been transmitted by an analyser such as Polaroid, it will
certainly be in whatever state the analyser transmits.
1.4 Measurement
Equation (1.28) expresses the quantum state of a system |ψ⟩as a sum over
states in which a particular measurement, such as energy, is certain to yield a
speciﬁed value. The coeﬃcients in this expansion yield as their mod-squares
the probabilities with which the possible results of the measurement will be
obtained. Hence so long as there is more than one term in the sum, the result
of the measurement is in doubt. This uncertainty does not reﬂect shortcom-
ings in the measuring apparatus, but is inherent in the physical situation –
any defects in the measuring apparatus will increase the uncertainty above
the irreducible minimum implied by the expansion coeﬃcients, and in §6.3
the theory will be adapted to include such additional uncertainty.
Here we are dealing with ideal measurements, and such measurements
are reproducible. Therefore, if a second measurement is made immediately
after the ﬁrst, the same result will be obtained. From this observation it
follows that the quantum state of the system is changed by the ﬁrst mea-
surement from |ψ⟩= P
i ai|i⟩to |ψ⟩= |I⟩, where |I⟩is the state in which
the measurement is guaranteed to yield the value that was obtained by the
ﬁrst measurement. The abrupt change in the quantum state from P
i ai|i⟩
to |I⟩that accompanies a measurement is referred to as the collapse of the
wavefunction.
What happens when the “wavefunction collapses”? It is tempting to
suppose that this event is not a physical one but merely an updating of
our knowledge of the system: that the system was already in the state |I⟩
before the measurement, but we only became aware of this fact when the
measurement was made. It turns out that this interpretation is untenable,
and that wavefunction collapse is associated with a real physical disturbance
of the system. This topic is explored further in §6.5.
Problems
1.1
What physical phenomenon requires us to work with probability am-
plitudes rather than just with probabilities, as in other ﬁelds of endeavour?
1.2
What properties cause complete sets of amplitudes to constitute the
elements of a vector space?
1.3
V ′ is the dual space of the vector space V . For a mathematician, what
objects comprise V ′?


16
Problems
1.4
In quantum mechanics, what objects are the members of the vector
space V ? Give an example for the case of quantum mechanics of a member
of the dual space V ′ and explain how members of V ′ enable us to predict
the outcomes of experiments.
1.5
Given that |ψ⟩= eiπ/5|a⟩+eiπ/4|b⟩, express ⟨ψ| as a linear combination
of ⟨a| and ⟨b|.
1.6
What properties characterise the bra ⟨a| that is associated with the ket
|a⟩?
1.7
An electron can be in one of two potential wells that are so close that
it can “tunnel” from one to the other (see §5.2 for a description of quantum-
mechanical tunnelling). Its state vector can be written
|ψ⟩= a|A⟩+ b|B⟩,
(1.45)
where |A⟩is the state of being in the ﬁrst well and |B⟩is the state of being in
the second well and all kets are correctly normalised. What is the probability
of ﬁnding the particle in the ﬁrst well given that: (a) a = i/2; (b) b = eiπ;
(c) b = 1
3 + i/
√
2?
1.8
An electron can “tunnel” between potential wells that form a chain, so
its state vector can be written
|ψ⟩=
∞
X
−∞
an|n⟩,
(1.46a)
where |n⟩is the state of being in the nth well, where n increases from left to
right. Let
an =
1
√2
−i
3
|n|/2
einπ.
(1.46b)
a. What is the probability of ﬁnding the electron in the nth well?
b. What is the probability of ﬁnding the electron in well 0 or anywhere to
the right of it?


2
Operators, measurement and time
evolution
In the last chapter we saw that each quantum state of a system is represented
by a point or ‘ket’ |ψ⟩that lies in an abstract vector space. We saw that
states for which there is no uncertainty in the value that will be measured
for a quantity such as energy, form a set of basis states for this space –
these basis states are analogous to the unit vectors i, j and k of ordinary
vector geometry. In this chapter we develop these ideas further by showing
how every measurable quantity such as position, momentum or energy is
associated with an operator on state space. We shall see that the energy
operator plays a special role in that it determines how a system’s ket |ψ⟩
moves through state space over time.
Using these operators we are able
at the end of the chapter to study the dynamics of a free particle, and to
understand how the uncertainties in the position and momentum of a particle
are intimately connected with one another, and how they evolve in time.
2.1 Operators
A linear operator on the vector space V is an object Q that transforms
kets into kets in a linear way. That is, if |ψ⟩is a ket, then |φ⟩= Q|ψ⟩is
another ket, and if |χ⟩is a third ket and α and β are complex numbers, we
have
Q
 α|ψ⟩+ β|χ⟩

= α(Q|ψ⟩) + β(Q|χ⟩).
(2.1)
Consider now the linear operator
I =
X
i
|i⟩⟨i|,
(2.2)
where {|i⟩} is any set of basis kets. I really is an operator because if we
apply it to any ket |ψ⟩, we get a linear combination of kets, which must itself
be a ket:
I|ψ⟩=
X
i
|i⟩⟨i|ψ⟩=
X
i
(⟨i|ψ⟩) |i⟩,
(2.3)


18
Chapter 2: Operators, measurement and time evolution
where we are able to move ⟨i|ψ⟩around freely because it’s just a complex
number. To determine which ket I|ψ⟩is, we substitute into (2.3) the expan-
sion (1.17) of |ψ⟩and use the orthogonality relation (1.22):
I|ψ⟩=
X
i
|i⟩⟨i|
 X
j
aj|j⟩

=
X
i
ai|i⟩= |ψ⟩.
(2.4)
We have shown that I applied to an arbitrary ket |ψ⟩yields that same ket.
Hence I is the identity operator. We shall make extensive use of this fact.
Consider now the operator
H =
X
i
Ei|Ei⟩⟨Ei|.
(2.5)
This is the most important single operator in quantum mechanics. It is called
the Hamiltonian in honour of W.R. Hamilton, who introduced its classical
analogue.1
We use H to operate on an arbitrary ket |ψ⟩to form the ket
H|ψ⟩, and then we bra through by the adjoint ⟨ψ| of |ψ⟩. We have
⟨ψ|H|ψ⟩=
X
i
Ei⟨ψ|Ei⟩⟨Ei|ψ⟩.
(2.6)
By equation (1.29) ⟨Ei|ψ⟩= ai, while by (1.24) ⟨ψ|Ei⟩= a∗
i . Thus
⟨ψ|H|ψ⟩=
X
i
Ei|ai|2 =
X
i
piEi = ⟨E⟩.
(2.7)
Here is yet another result of fundamental importance: if we squeeze the
Hamiltonian between a quantum state |ψ⟩and its adjoint bra, we obtain the
expectation value of the energy for that state.
It is straightforward to generalise this result for the expectation value
of the energy to other measurable quantities: if Q is something that we can
measure (often called an observable) and its spectrum of possible values is
{qi}, then we expand an arbitrary ket |ψ⟩as a linear combination of states
|qi⟩in which the value of Q is well deﬁned,
|ψ⟩=
X
i
ai|qi⟩,
(2.8)
and with Q we associate the operator
Q =
X
i
qi|qi⟩⟨qi|.
(2.9)
Then ⟨ψ|Q|ψ⟩is the expectation value of Q when our system is in the state
|ψ⟩. When the state in question is obvious from the context, we shall some-
times write the expectation value of Q simply as ⟨Q⟩.
When a linear operator R turns up in any mathematical problem, it
is generally expedient to investigate its eigenvalues and eigenvectors. An
eigenvector is a vector that R simply rescales, and its eigenvalue is the
rescaling factor. Thus, let |r⟩be an eigenvector of R, and r be its eigenvalue,
then we have
R|r⟩= r|r⟩.
(2.10)
1 William Rowan Hamilton (1805–1865) was a protestant Irishman who was appointed
the Andrews’ Professor of Astronomy at Trinity College Dublin while still an undergrad-
uate. Although he did not contribute to astronomy, he made important contributions to
optics and mechanics, and to pure mathematics with his invention of quaternions, the ﬁrst
non-commutative algebra.


2.1 Operators
19
Box 2.1:
Hermitian Operators
Let Q be a Hermitian operator with eigenvalues qi and eigenvectors |qi⟩.
Then we bra the deﬁning equation of |qi⟩through by ⟨qk|, and bra the
deﬁning equation of |qk⟩through by ⟨qi|:
⟨qk|Q|qi⟩= qi⟨qk|qi⟩
⟨qi|Q|qk⟩= qk⟨qi|qk⟩.
We next take the complex conjugate of the second equation from the ﬁrst.
The left side then vanishes because Q is Hermitian, so with equation
(1.27)
0 = (qi −q∗
k)⟨qk|qi⟩.
Setting k = i we ﬁnd that qi = q∗
i since ⟨qi|qi⟩> 0. Hence the eigenvalues
are real. When qi̸ = qk, we must have ⟨qk|qi⟩= 0, so the eigenvectors
belonging to distinct eigenvalues are orthogonal.
What are the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of H? If we apply H to |Ek⟩, we
ﬁnd
H|Ek⟩=
X
i
Ei|Ei⟩⟨Ei|Ek⟩= Ek|Ek⟩.
(2.11)
So the eigenvectors of H are the states of well deﬁned energy, and its eigen-
values are the possible results of a measurement of energy.
Clearly this
important result generalises immediately to eigenvectors and eigenvalues of
the operator Q that we have associated with an arbitrary observable.
Consider the complex number ⟨φ|Q|ψ⟩, where |φ⟩and |ψ⟩are two arbi-
trary quantum states. After expanding the states in terms of the eigenvectors
of Q, we have
⟨φ|Q|ψ⟩=
 X
i
b∗
i ⟨qi|

Q
 X
j
aj|qj⟩

=
X
ij
b∗
i ajqjδij =
X
i
b∗
i qiai (2.12)
Similarly, ⟨ψ|Q|φ⟩= P
i a∗
i qibi. Hence so long as the spectrum {qi} of Q
consists entirely of real numbers (which is physically reasonable), then
(⟨φ|Q|ψ⟩)∗= ⟨ψ|Q|φ⟩
(2.13)
for any two states |φ⟩and |ψ⟩. An operator with this property is said to
be Hermitian. Hermitian operators have nice properties. In particular,
one can prove – see Box 2.1 – that they have real eigenvalues and mutually
orthogonal eigenvectors, and it is because we require these properties on
physical grounds that the operators of observables turn out to be Hermitian.
In Chapter 4 we shall ﬁnd that Hermitian operators arise naturally from
another physical point of view.
Although the operators associated with observables are always Hermi-
tian, operators that are not Hermitian turn out to be extremely useful. With
a non-Hermitian operator R we associate another operator R† called its Her-
mitian adjoint by requiring that for any states |φ⟩and |ψ⟩it is true that
 ⟨φ|R†|ψ⟩
∗= ⟨ψ|R|φ⟩.
(2.14)
Comparing this equation with equation (2.13) it is clear that a Hermitian
operator Q is its own adjoint: Q† = Q.
By expanding the kets |φ⟩and |ψ⟩in the equation |φ⟩= R|ψ⟩as sums of
basis kets, we show that R is completely determined by the array of numbers
(called matrix elements)
Rij ≡⟨i|R|j⟩.
(2.15)


20
Chapter 2: Operators, measurement and time evolution
Table 2.1
Rules for Hermitian adjoints
Object
i
|ψ⟩
R
QR
R|ψ⟩
⟨φ|R|ψ⟩
Adjoint
−i
⟨ψ|
R†
R†Q†
⟨ψ|R†
⟨ψ|R†|φ⟩
In fact
|φ⟩=
X
i
bi|i⟩= R|ψ⟩=
X
j
ajR|j⟩
⇒
bi =
X
j
aj⟨i|R|j⟩=
X
j
Rijaj.
(2.16)
If in equation (2.14) we set |φ⟩= |i⟩and |ψ⟩= |j⟩, we discover the
relation between the matrix of R and that of R†:
(R†
ij)∗= Rji
⇔
R†
ij = R∗
ji.
(2.17)
Hence the matrix of R† is the complex-conjugate transpose of the matrix
for R. If R is Hermitian so that R† = R, the matrix Rij must equal its
complex-conjugate transpose, that is, it must be an Hermitian matrix.
Operators can be multiplied together: when the operator QR operates
on |ψ⟩, the result is what you get by operating ﬁrst with R and then applying
Q to R|ψ⟩. We shall frequently need to ﬁnd the Hermitian adjoints of such
products. To ﬁnd out how to do this we replace R in (2.17) by QR:
(QR)†
ij = (QR)∗
ji =
X
k
Q∗
jkR∗
ki =
X
k
R†
ikQ†
kj = (R†Q†)ij.
(2.18)
Thus, to dagger a product we reverse the terms and dagger the individual
operators. By induction it is now easy to show that
(ABC . . . Z)† = Z† . . . C†B†A†.
(2.19)
If we agree that the Hermitian adjoint of a complex number is its com-
plex conjugate and that |ψ⟩† ≡⟨ψ| and ⟨ψ|† ≡|ψ⟩, then we can consider the
basic rule (2.14) for taking the complex conjugate of a matrix element to be
a generalisation of the rule we have derived about reversing the order and
daggering the components of a product of operators. The rules for taking
Hermitian adjoints are summarised in Table 2.1.
Functions of operators
We shall frequently need to evaluate functions
of operators. For example, the potential energy of a particle is a function
V (ˆx) of the position operator ˆx. Let f be any function of one variable and
R be any operator. Then we deﬁne the operator f(R) by the equation
f(R) ≡
X
i
f(ri)|ri⟩⟨ri|,
(2.20)
where the ri and |ri⟩are the eigenvalues and eigenkets of R. This deﬁnition
deﬁnes f(R) to be the operator that has the same eigenkets as R and the
eigenvalues that you get by evaluating the function f on the eigenvalues of
R.
Commutators
The commutator of two operators A, B is deﬁned to be
[A, B] ≡AB −BA.
(2.21)
If [A, B]̸ = 0, it is impossible to ﬁnd a complete set of mutual eigenkets of A
and B (Problem 2.19). Conversely, it can be shown that if [A, B] = 0 there
is a complete set of mutual eigenkets of A and B, that is, there is a complete
set of states of the system in which there is no uncertainty in the value that
will be obtained for either A or B. We shall make extensive use of this fact.


2.2 Time evolution
21
Notice that the word complete appears in both these statements; even in the
case [A, B]̸ = 0 it may be possible to ﬁnd states in which both A and B
have deﬁnite values. It is just that such states cannot form a complete set.
Similarly, when [A, B] = 0 there can be states for which A has a deﬁnite
value but B does not. The literature is full of inaccurate statements about
the implications of [A, B] being zero or non-zero.
Three invaluable rules are
[A + B, C] = [A, C] + [B, C]
AB = BA + [A, B]
[AB, C] = [A, C]B + A[B, C].
(2.22)
All three rules are trivial to prove by explicitly writing out the contents of
the square brackets. With these rules it is rarely necessary to write out the
contents of a commutator again, so they eliminate a common source of error
and tedium in calculations. Notice the similarity of the third rule to the
standard rule for diﬀerentiating a product: d(ab)/dc = (da/dc)b + a(db/dc).
The rule is easily generalised by induction to the rule
[ABC . . . , Z] = [A, Z]BC . . . + A[B, Z]C . . . + AB[C, Z] . . .
(2.23)
We shall frequently need to evaluate the commutator of an operator
A with a function f of an operator B. We assume that f has a convergent
Taylor series2 f = f0+f ′B+ 1
2f ′′B2+· · ·, where f0 ≡f(0), f ′ ≡(df(x)/dx)0,
etc., are numbers. Then
[A, f(B)] = f ′[A, B] + 1
2f ′′([A, B]B + B[A, B])
+ 1
3!f ′′′([A, B]B2 + B[A, B]B + B2[A, B]) + · · ·
(2.24)
In the important case in which B commutes with [A, B], this expression
simpliﬁes dramatically
[A, f(B)] = [A, B](f ′ + f ′′B + 1
2f ′′′B2 + · · ·) = [A, B] df
dB .
(2.25)
We shall use this formula several times.
2.2 Evolution in time
Since physics is about predicting the future, equations of motion lie at its
heart. Newtonian dynamics is dominated by the equation of motion f =
ma, where f is the force on a particle of mass m and a is the resulting
acceleration. In quantum mechanics the analogous dynamical equation is
the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation (TDSE):3
i¯h∂|ψ⟩
∂t
= H|ψ⟩.
(2.26)
For future reference we use the rules of Table 2.1 to derive from this equation
the equation of motion of a bra:
−i¯h∂⟨ψ|
∂t
= ⟨ψ|H,
(2.27)
2 If necessary, we expand f(x) about some point x0̸ = 0, i.e., in powers of x −x0, so
we don’t need to worry that the series about the origin may not converge for all x.
3 Beginners sometimes interpret the tdse as stating that H = i¯h∂/∂t.
This is as
unhelpful as interpreting f = ma as a deﬁnition of f. For Newton’s equation to be useful
it has to be supplemented by a description of the forces acting on the particle. Similarly,
the tdse is useful only when we have another expression for H.


22
Chapter 2: Operators, measurement and time evolution
where we have used the fact that H is Hermitian, so H† = H. The great
importance of the Hamiltonian operator is due to its appearance in the tdse,
which must be satisﬁed by the ket of any system. We shall see below in
several concrete examples that the tdse, which we have not attempted to
motivate physically, generates familiar motions in circumstances that permit
classical mechanics to be used.
One perhaps surprising aspect of the tdse we can justify straight away:
while Newton’s second law is a second-order diﬀerential equation, the tdse
is ﬁrst-order. Since it is ﬁrst order, the boundary data at t = 0 required to
solve for |ψ, t⟩at t > 0 comprise the ket |ψ, 0⟩. If the equation were second-
order in time, like Newton’s law, the required boundary data would include
∂|ψ⟩/∂t. But |ψ, 0⟩by hypothesis constitutes a complete set of amplitudes;
it embodies everything we know about the current state of the system. If
mathematics required us to know something about the system in addition to
|ψ, 0⟩, then either |ψ⟩would not constitute a complete set of amplitudes, or
physics could oﬀer no hope of predicting the future, and it would be time to
take up biology or accountancy, or whatever.
The tdse tells us that states of well-deﬁned energy evolve in time in an
exceptionally simple way
i¯h∂|En⟩
∂t
= H|En⟩= En|En⟩,
(2.28)
which implies that
|En, t⟩= |En, 0⟩e−iEnt/¯h.
(2.29)
That is, the passage of time simply changes the phase of the ket at a rate
En/¯h.
We can use this result to calculate the time evolution of an arbitrary
state |ψ⟩. In the energy representation the state is
|ψ, t⟩=
X
n
an(t)|En, t⟩.
(2.30)
Substituting this expansion into the tdse (2.26) we ﬁnd
i¯h∂|ψ⟩
∂t
=
X
n
i¯h

˙an|En⟩+ an
∂|En⟩
∂t

=
X
n
anH|En⟩,
(2.31)
where a dot denotes diﬀerentiation with respect to time.
The right side
cancels with the second term in the middle, so we have ˙an = 0. Since the an
are constant, on eliminating |En, t⟩between equations (2.29) and (2.30), we
ﬁnd that the evolution of |ψ⟩is simply given by
|ψ, t⟩=
X
n
ane−iEnt/¯h|En, 0⟩.
(2.32)
We shall use this result time and again.
States of well-deﬁned energy are unphysical and never occur in Nature
because they are incapable of changing in any way, and hence it is impossible
to get a system into such a state. But they play an extremely important role
in quantum mechanics because they provide the almost trivial solution (2.32)
to the governing equation of the theory, (2.26). Given the central role of these
states, we spend much time solving their deﬁning equation
H|En⟩= En|En⟩,
(2.33)
which is known as the time-independent Schr¨odinger equation, or
TISE for short.


2.2 Time evolution
23
2.2.1 Evolution of expectation values
We have seen that ⟨ψ|Q|ψ⟩is the expectation value of the observable Q
when the system is in the state |ψ⟩, and that expectation values provide a
natural connection to classical physics, which is about situations in which the
result of a measurement is almost certain to lie very close to the quantum-
mechanical expectation value. We can use the tdse to determine the rate
of change of this expectation value:
i¯h d
dt⟨ψ|Q|ψ⟩= −⟨ψ|HQ|ψ⟩+ i¯h⟨ψ|∂Q
∂t |ψ⟩+ ⟨ψ|QH|ψ⟩
= ⟨ψ|[Q, H]|ψ⟩+ i¯h⟨ψ|∂Q
∂t |ψ⟩,
(2.34)
where we have used both the tdse (2.26) and its Hermitian adjoint (2.27)
and the square bracket denotes a commutator – see (2.21). Usually operators
are independent of time (i.e., ∂Q/∂t = 0), and then the rate of change of an
expectation value is the expectation value of the operator −i[Q, H]/¯h. This
important result is known as Ehrenfest’s theorem.
If a time-independent operator Q happens to commute with the Hamil-
tonian, that is if [Q, H] = 0, then for any state |ψ⟩the expectation value
of Q is constant in time, or a conserved quantity.
Moreover, in these
circumstances Q2 also commutes with H, so ⟨ψ|(∆Q)2|ψ⟩=

Q2
−⟨Q⟩2
is also constant. If initially ψ is a state of well-deﬁned Q, i.e., |ψ⟩= |qi⟩
for some i, then

(∆Q)2
= 0 at all times. Hence, whenever [Q, H] = 0,
a state of well deﬁned Q evolves into another such state, so the value of Q
can be known precisely at all times. The value qi is then said to be a good
quantum number. We always need to label states in some way. The label
should be something that can be checked at any time and is not constantly
changing. Good quantum numbers have precisely these properties, so they
are much employed as labels of states.
If the system is in a state of well deﬁned energy, the expectation value
of any time-independent operator is time-independent, even if the operator
does not commute with H.
This is true because in these circumstances
equation (2.34) becomes
i¯h d
dt⟨E|Q|E⟩= ⟨E|(QH −HQ)|E⟩= (E −E)⟨E|Q|E⟩= 0,
(2.35)
where we have used the equation H|E⟩= E|E⟩and its Hermitian adjoint.
In view of this property of having constant expectation values of all time-
independent operators, states of well deﬁned energy are called stationary
states.
Since H inevitably commutes with itself, equation (2.34) gives for the
rate of change of the expectation of the energy
d ⟨E⟩
dt
=
∂H
∂t

.
(2.36)
In particular ⟨E⟩is constant if the Hamiltonian is time-independent. This
is a statement of the principle of the conservation of energy since time-
dependence of the Hamiltonian arises only when some external force is work-
ing on the system.
For example, a particle that is gyrating in a time-
dependent magnetic ﬁeld has a time-dependent Hamiltonian because work
is being done either on or by the currents that generate the ﬁeld.


24
Chapter 2: Operators, measurement and time evolution
2.3 The position representation
If the system consists of a single particle that can move in only one dimension,
the amplitudes ψ(x) to ﬁnd the particle at x for x in (−∞, ∞) constitute a
complete set of amplitudes. By analogy with equation (1.29) we have4
|ψ⟩=
Z ∞
−∞
dx ψ(x)|x⟩.
(2.37)
Here an integral replaces the sum because the spectrum of possible values
of x is continuous rather than discrete. Our basis kets are the states |x⟩in
which the particle is deﬁnitely at x. By analogy with equation (1.30) we
have
ψ(x) = ⟨x|ψ⟩.
(2.38)
Notice that both sides of this equation are complex numbers that depend on
the variable x, that is, they are complex-valued functions of x. For historical
reasons, the function ψ(x) is called the wavefunction of the particle. By
the usual rule (1.27) for complex conjugation of a bra-ket we have
ψ∗(x) = ⟨ψ|x⟩.
(2.39)
The analogue for the kets |x⟩of the orthogonality relation (1.22) is
⟨x′|x⟩= δ(x −x′),
(2.40)
where the Dirac delta function δ(x −x′) is zero for x̸ = x′ because when
the particle is at x, it has zero amplitude to be at a diﬀerent location x′.
We get insight into the value of δ(x −x′) for x = x′ by multiplying equation
(2.37) through by ⟨x′| and using equation (2.38) to eliminate ⟨x′|ψ⟩:
⟨x′|ψ⟩= ψ(x′) =
Z
dx ψ(x)⟨x′|x⟩
=
Z
dx ψ(x)δ(x −x′).
(2.41)
Since δ(x −x′) is zero for x̸ = x′, we can replace ψ(x) in the integrand by
ψ(x′) and then take this number outside the integral sign and cancel it with
the ψ(x′) on the left hand side. What remains is the equation
1 =
Z
dx δ(x −x′).
(2.42)
Thus there is unit area under the graph of δ(x), which is remarkable, given
that the function vanishes for x̸ = 0! Although the name of δ(x) includes
the word ‘function’, this object is not really a function because we cannot
assign it a value at the origin. It is best considered to be the limit of a series
of functions that all have unit area under their graphs but become more and
more sharply peaked around the origin (see Figure 2.1).
The analogue of equation (1.31) is
Z
dx |ψ(x)|2 = 1,
(2.43)
which expresses the physical requirement that there is unit probability of
ﬁnding the particle at some value of x.
The analogue of equation (2.2) is
I =
Z
dx |x⟩⟨x|.
(2.44)
4 The analogy would be clearer if we wrote a(x) for ψ(x), but for historical reasons
the letter ψ is hard to avoid in this context.


2.3 Position representation
25
Figure 2.1 A series of Gaussians of unit area. The Dirac delta function is the limit of
this series of functions as the dispersion tends to zero.
It is instructive to check that the operator that is deﬁned by the right side
of this equation really is the identity operator. Applying the operator to an
arbitrary state |ψ⟩we ﬁnd
I|ψ⟩=
Z
dx |x⟩⟨x|ψ⟩
(2.45)
By equations (2.37) and (2.38) the expression on the right of this equation
is |ψ⟩, so I is indeed the identity operator.
When we multiply (2.45) by ⟨φ| on the left, we obtain an important
formula
⟨φ|ψ⟩=
Z
dx ⟨φ|x⟩⟨x|ψ⟩=
Z
dx φ∗(x)ψ(x),
(2.46)
where the second equality uses equations (2.38) and (2.39). Many practical
problems reduce to the evaluation of an amplitude such as ⟨φ|ψ⟩. The expres-
sion on the right of equation (2.46) is a well deﬁned integral that evaluates
to the desired number.
By analogy with equation (2.5), the position operator is
ˆx =
Z
dx x|x⟩⟨x|.
(2.47)
After applying ˆx to a ket |ψ⟩we have a ket |φ⟩= ˆx|ψ⟩whose wavefunction
φ(x′) = ⟨x′|ˆx|ψ⟩is
φ(x′) = ⟨x′|ˆx|ψ⟩=
Z
dx x⟨x′|x⟩⟨x|ψ⟩
=
Z
dx xδ(x −x′)ψ(x) = x′ψ(x′),
(2.48)
where we have used equations (2.38) and (2.40). Equation (2.48) states that
the operator ˆx simply multiplies the wavefunction ψ(x) by its argument.
In the position representation, operators turn functions of x into other
functions of x. An easy way of making a new function out of an old one is
to diﬀerentiate it. So consider the operator ˆp that is deﬁned by
⟨x|ˆp|ψ⟩= (ˆpψ)(x) = −i¯h∂ψ
∂x .
(2.49)
In Box 2.2 we show that the factor i ensures that ˆp is a Hermitian operator.
The factor ¯h ensures that ˆp has the dimensions of momentum:5 we will ﬁnd
5 Planck’s constant h = 2π¯h has dimensions of distance×momentum, or, equivalently,
energy × time, or, most simply, angular momentum.


26
Chapter 2: Operators, measurement and time evolution
Box 2.2:
Proof that ˆp is Hermitian
We have to show that for any states |φ⟩and |ψ⟩, ⟨ψ|ˆp|φ⟩= (⟨φ|ˆp|ψ⟩)∗. We
use equation (2.49) to write the left side of this equation in the position
representation:
⟨ψ|ˆp|φ⟩= −i¯h
Z
dx ψ∗(x)∂φ
∂x.
Integrating by parts this becomes
⟨ψ|ˆp|φ⟩= −i¯h

ψ∗φ
∞
−∞−
Z
dx φ(x)∂ψ∗
∂x

.
We assume that all wavefunctions vanish at spatial inﬁnity, so the term
in square brackets vanishes, and
⟨ψ|ˆp|φ⟩= i¯h
Z
dx φ(x)∂ψ∗
∂x = (⟨φ|ˆp|ψ⟩)∗.
that ˆp is the momentum operator. In Newtonian physics the momentum
of a particle of mass m and velocity ˙x is m ˙x, so let’s use equation (2.34) to
calculate d ⟨ˆx⟩/dt and see whether it is ⟨ˆp⟩/m.
2.3.1 Hamiltonian of a particle
To calculate any time derivatives in quantum mechanics we need to know
what the Hamiltonian operator H of our system is because H appears in the
tdse (2.26). Equation (2.5) deﬁnes H in the energy representation, but not
how to write H in the position representation. We are going to have to make
an informed guess and justify our guess later.
The Newtonian expression for the energy of a particle is
E = 1
2m ˙x2 + V = p2
2m + V,
(2.50)
where V (x) is the particle’s potential energy. So we guess that the Hamilto-
nian of a particle is
H = ˆp2
2m + V (ˆx),
(2.51)
where the square of ˆp means the act of operating with ˆp twice (ˆp2 ≡ˆpˆp). The
meaning of V (ˆx) is given by equation (2.20) with V and ˆx substituted for f
and R. Working from that equation in close analogy with the calculation in
equation (2.48) demonstrates that in the position representation the operator
V (ˆx) acts on a wavefunction ψ(x) simply by multiplying ψ by V (x). That
is, ⟨x|V (ˆx)|ψ⟩= V (x)ψ(x).
Now that we have guessed that H is given by equation (2.51), the next
step in the calculation of the rate of change of ⟨ˆx⟩is to evaluate the commu-
tator of ˆx and H. Making use of equations (2.22) we ﬁnd
[ˆx, H] =

ˆx, ˆp2
2m + V

= [ˆx, ˆpˆp]
2m
+ [ˆx, V (ˆx)]
= [ˆx, ˆp]ˆp + ˆp[ˆx, ˆp]
2m
.
(2.52)
In the last equality we have used the fact that [ˆx, V (ˆx)] = 0, which follows
because both ˆx and V (ˆx) act by multiplication, and ordinary multiplication
is a commutative operation. We now have to determine the value of the


2.3 Position representation
27
commutator [ˆx, ˆp]. We return to the deﬁnition (2.49) of ˆp and calculate the
wavefunction produced by applying [ˆx, ˆp] to an arbitrary state |ψ⟩
⟨x|[ˆx, ˆp]|ψ⟩= ⟨x|(ˆxˆp −ˆpˆx)|ψ⟩= −i¯h

x∂ψ
∂x −∂(xψ)
∂x

= i¯h⟨x|ψ⟩.
(2.53)
Since this equation holds for any |ψ⟩, we have the operator equation
[ˆx, ˆp] = i¯h.
(2.54)
This key result, that the commutator of ˆx with ˆp is the constant i¯h, is called
a canonical commutation relation.6 Two observables whose commutator
is ±i¯h are said to be canonically conjugate to one another, or conjugate
observables.
Finally we have the hoped-for relation between p and ˙x: substituting
equations (2.53) and (2.54) into equation (2.34) we have
d ⟨x⟩
dt
= d
dt⟨ψ|ˆx|ψ⟩= −i
¯h⟨ψ|[ˆx, H]|ψ⟩= −i
¯h
i¯h
m⟨ψ|ˆp|ψ⟩
= 1
m ⟨ˆp⟩.
(2.55)
This result makes it highly plausible that ˆp is indeed the momentum operator.
A calculation of the rate of change of ⟨ˆp⟩will increase the plausibility
still further. Again working from (2.34) and using (2.51) we have
d ⟨ˆp⟩
dt
= −i
¯h ⟨[ˆp, H]⟩= −i
¯h ⟨[ˆp, V ]⟩.
(2.56)
Since [ˆp, ˆx] = −i¯h is just a number, equation (2.25) for the commutator of
one operator with a function of another operator can be used to evaluate
[ˆp, V (ˆx)]. We then have
d ⟨ˆp⟩
dt
= −
dV
dˆx

.
(2.57)
That is, the expectation of the rate of change of the momentum is equal
to the expectation of the force on the particle.
Thus we have recovered
Newton’s second law from the tdse. This achievement gives us conﬁdence
that (2.51) is the correct expression for H.
2.3.2 Wavefunction for well deﬁned momentum
From the discussion below equation (2.11) we know that the state |p⟩in which
a measurement of the momentum will certainly yield the value p has to be
an eigenstate of ˆp. We ﬁnd the wavefunction up(x) = ⟨x|p⟩of this important
state by using equation (2.49) to write the deﬁning equation ˆp|p⟩= p|p⟩in
the position representation:
⟨x|ˆp|p⟩= −i¯h∂up
∂x = p⟨x|p⟩= pup(x).
(2.58)
The solution of this diﬀerential equation is
up(x) = Aeipx/¯h.
(2.59)
6 The name that derives from ‘canonical coordinates’ in Hamilton’s formulation of
classical mechanics.


28
Chapter 2: Operators, measurement and time evolution
Box 2.3:
Gaussian integrals
Consider the integral
I ≡
Z ∞
−∞
dx e−(b2x2+ax),
(1)
where a and b are constants. We observe that b2x2 +ax = (bx+a/2b)2 −
a2/4b2. Thus we may write I = ea2/4b2b−1 R dz e−z2, where z ≡bx+a/2b.
The integral is equal to √π. Hence we have the very useful result
Z ∞
−∞
dx e−(b2x2+ax) =
√π
b ea2/4b2.
(2)
Hence the wavefunction of a particle of well deﬁned momentum is a plane
wave with wavelength λ = 2π/k = h/
√
2mE, where m is the particle’s mass
and E its kinetic energy; λ is called the particle’s de Broglie wavelength.7
If we try to choose the constant A in (2.59) to ensure that up satisﬁes
the usual normalisation condition (2.43), we will fail because the integral
over all x of |eipx/¯h|2 = 1 is undeﬁned. Instead we choose A as follows. By
analogy with (2.40) we require ⟨p′|p⟩= δ(p −p′). When we use (2.44) to
insert an identity operator into this expression, it becomes
δ(p −p′) =
Z
dx ⟨p′|x⟩⟨x|p⟩= |A|2
Z
dx ei(p−p′)x/¯h = 2π¯h|A|2δ(p −p′),
(2.60)
where we have used equation (C.12) to evaluate the integral. Thus |A|2 =
h−1, where h = 2π¯h is Planck’s constant, and the correctly normalised wave-
function of a particle of momentum p is
up(x) ≡⟨x|p⟩=
1
√h eipx/¯h.
(2.61)
The uncertainty principle
It follows from (2.61) that the position of a
particle that has well deﬁned momentum is maximally uncertain: all values of
x are equally probable because |up|2 is independent of x. This phenomenon
is said to be a consequence of the uncertainty principle,8 namely that
when an observable has a well-deﬁned value, all values of the canonically
conjugate observable are equally probable.
We can gain useful insight into the workings of the uncertainty principle
by calculating the variance in momentum measurements for states in which
measurements of position are subject to varying degrees of uncertainty. For
deﬁniteness we take the probability density |ψ(x)|2 to be a Gaussian distri-
bution of dispersion σ. So we write
ψ(x) =
1
(2πσ2)1/4 e−x2/4σ2.
(2.62)
With equations (2.46) and (2.61) we ﬁnd that in this state the amplitude to
measure momentum p is
⟨p|ψ⟩=
Z
dx u∗
p(x)ψ(x) =
1
√
h(2πσ2)1/4
Z
dx e−ipx/¯h e−x2/4σ2.
(2.63)
7 Louis de Broglie (1892–1987) was the second son of the Duc de Broglie. In 1924 his
PhD thesis introduced the concept of matter waves, by considering relativistic invariance
of phase. For this work he won the 1929 Nobel prize for physics. In later years he struggled
to ﬁnd a causal rather than probabilistic interpretation of quantum mechanics.
8 First stated by Werner Heisenberg, Z. Phys., 43, 172 (1927), and consequently often
called ‘Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle’.


2.3 Position representation
29
Box 2.3 explains how integrals of this type are evaluated. Setting a = ip/¯h
and b = (2σ)−1 in equation (2) of Box 2.3 we ﬁnd
⟨p|ψ⟩=
2σ√π
√
h(2πσ2)1/4 e−σ2p2/¯h2 =
1
(2π¯h2/4σ2)1/4 e−σ2p2/¯h2.
(2.64)
The probability density |⟨p|ψ⟩|2 is a Gaussian centred on zero with a disper-
sion σp in p that equals ¯h/2σ. Thus, the more sharply peaked the particle’s
probability distribution is in x, the broader the distribution is in p. The
product of the dispersions in x and p is always 1
2¯h: σpσ = 1
2¯h.
This trade-oﬀbetween the uncertainties in x and p arises because when
we expand |ψ⟩in eigenkets of ˆp, localisation of the probability amplitude
ψ(x) is caused by interference between states of diﬀerent momenta: in the
position representation, these states are plane waves of wavelength h/p that
have the same amplitude everywhere, and interference between waves of very
diﬀerent wavelengths is required if the region of constructive interference is
to be strongly conﬁned.
2.3.3 Dynamics of a free particle
We now consider the motion of a free particle – one that is subject to no forces
so we can drop the potential term in the Hamiltonian (2.51). Consequently,
the Hamiltonian of a free particle,
H = ˆp2
2m,
(2.65)
is a function of ˆp alone, so its eigenkets will be the eigenkets (2.61) of ˆp.
By expressing any ket |ψ⟩as a linear combination of these eigenkets, and
using the basic time-evolution equation (2.32), we can follow the motion of
a particle from the initial state |ψ⟩. We illustrate this procedure with the
case in which ψ corresponds to the particle being approximately at the origin
with momentum near some value p0. Equation (2.64) gives ⟨p|ψ⟩for the case
in which p0 vanishes. The amplitude distribution that we require is
⟨p|ψ, 0⟩=
1
(2π¯h2/4σ2)1/4 e−σ2(p−p0)2/¯h2.
(2.66)
We can now use (2.32) to obtain the wavefunction t units of time later
⟨x|ψ, t⟩=
Z
dp ⟨x|p⟩⟨p|ψ, 0⟩e−ip2t/2m¯h
=
1
√
h(2π¯h2/4σ2)1/4
Z
dp eipx/¯he−σ2(p−p0)2/¯h2e−ip2t/2m¯h.
(2.67)
Evaluating the integral in this expression involves some tiresome algebra
– you can ﬁnd the details in Box 2.4 if you are interested. We want the
probability density at time t of ﬁnding the particle at x, which is the mod-
square of equation (2.67). From the last equation of Box 2.4 we have
|⟨x|ψ, t⟩|2 =
σ
√
2π¯h2|b|2 exp
−(x −p0t/m)2σ2
2¯h4|b|4

.
(2.68)
This is a Gaussian distribution whose centre moves with the velocity p0/m
associated with the most probable momentum in the initial data (2.66). The
square of the Gaussian’s dispersion is
σ2(t) = σ2 +
 ¯ht
2mσ
2
.
(2.69)


30
Chapter 2: Operators, measurement and time evolution
Box 2.4: Evaluating the integral in equation (2.67)
The integral is of the form discussed in Box 2.3.
To clean it up we
replace the p2 in the third exponential with (p −p0)2 + 2p0p −p2
0 and
gather together all three exponents:
⟨x|ψ, t⟩=
eip2
0t/2m¯h
√
h(2π¯h2/4σ2)1/4
×
Z
dp exp
ip
¯h

x −p0t
m

−(p −p0)2
σ2
¯h2 +
it
2m¯h

.
In Box 2.3 we now set
a = i
¯h

x −p0t
m

;
b2 =
σ2
¯h2 +
it
2m¯h

and conclude that
⟨x|ψ, t⟩=
eip2
0t/2m¯h
√
h(2π¯h2/4σ2)1/4 exp
ip0
¯h

x −p0t
m
 √π
b e−(x−p0t/m)2/4¯h2b2.
This is a complicated result because b is a complex number, but its mod-
square, equation (2.68), is relatively simple.
We saw above that in the initial data the uncertainty in p is ∼σp = ¯h/2σ,
which translates to an uncertainty in velocity ∆v ∼¯h/2mσ. After time t
this uncertainty should lead to an additional uncertainty in position ∆x =
∆vt ∼¯ht/2mσ in perfect agreement with equation (2.69).
These results complete the demonstration that the identiﬁcation of the
operator ˆp deﬁned by equation (2.49) with the momentum operator, together
with the Hamiltonian (2.51), enable us to recover as much of Newtonian me-
chanics as we expect to continue valid outside the classical regime. The idea
that in an appropriate limit the predictions of quantum mechanics should
agree with classical mechanics is often called the correspondence prin-
ciple. The discipline of checking that one’s calculations comply with the
correspondence principle is useful in several ways: (i) it provides a check on
the calculations, helping one to locate missing factors of i or incorrect signs,
(ii) it deepens one’s understanding of classical physics, and (iii) it draws at-
tention to novel predictions of quantum mechanics that have no counterparts
in classical mechanics.
In the process of checking the correspondence principle for a free particle
we have stumbled on a new principle, the uncertainty principle, which implies
that the more tightly constrained the value of one observable is, the more
uncertain the value of the conjugate variable must be. Notice that these
uncertainties do not arise from measurement errors: we have assumed that
x and p can be measured exactly. The uncertainties we have discussed are
inherent in the situation and can only be increased by deﬁciencies in the
measurement process.
Our calculations have also shown how far-reaching the principle of quan-
tum interference is: equation (2.67), upon which our understanding of the
dynamics of a free particle rests, expresses the amplitude for the particle to
be found at x at time t as an integral over momenta of the amplitude to travel
at momentum p. It is through interference between the inﬁnite number of
contributing amplitudes that classically recognisable dynamics is recovered.
Had we mod-squared the amplitudes before adding them, as classical prob-
ability theory would suggest, we would have obtained entirely unphysical
results.


2.3 Position representation
31
2.3.4 Back to two-slit interference
When we discussed the two-slit interference experiment in §1.2.1, we stated
without proof that φ1 −φ2 ∝x, where φi(x) is the phase of the amplitude
Ai(x) for an electron to arrive at the point x on the screen P after passing
through the slit Si. We can now justify this assertion and derive the constant
of proportionality. Once the constant has been determined, it is possible to
assess the feasibility of the experiment from a practical point of view.
We assume that the quantum state of an electron as it emerges from
the electron gun can be approximated by a state of well deﬁned momentum
|p⟩. So the wavefunction between the gun and the screen with the slits is a
plane wave of wavelength λ = h/p. As an electron passes through a slit we
assume that it is deﬂected slightly but retains its former kinetic energy. So we
approximate its wavefunction after passing through the slit by a wave that is
no longer plane, but still has wavelength λ. Hence the phase of this wave at
position x on the screen P will be the phase at the slit plus 2πD/λ = pD/¯h,
where D(x) is the distance from x to the slit. By Pythagoras’s theorem
D =
p
L2 + (x ± s)2,
(2.70)
where L is the distance between the screen with the slits and P, 2s is the
distance between the slits, and the plus sign applies for one slit and the minus
sign to the other. We assume that both x and s are much smaller than L
so the square root can be expanded by the binomial theorem. We then ﬁnd
that the diﬀerence of the phases is
φ1 −φ2 ≃2psx
¯hL .
(2.71)
The distance X between the dark bands on P is the value of x for which the
left side becomes 2π, so
X = hL
2ps.
(2.72)
Let’s put some numbers into this formula. Since h = 6.63 × 10−34 J s is very
small, there is a danger that X will come out too small to produce observable
bands. Therefore we choose L fairly large and both p and s small. Suppose
we adopt 1 m for L and 1 µm for s. From the Hamiltonian (2.65) we have p =
√
2mE. A reasonable energy for the electrons is E = 100 eV = 1.6 × 10−17 J,
which yields p = 5.5 × 10−24 Ns, and X = 0.057 mm. Hence there should be
no diﬃculty observing a sinusoidal pattern that has this period.
What do the numbers look like for bullets? On a ﬁring range we can
probably stretch L to 1000 m. The distance between the slits clearly has
to be larger than the diameter of a bullet, so we take s = 1 cm. A bullet
weighs ∼10 gm and travels at ∼300 ms−1.
Equation (2.72) now yields
X ∼10−29 m.
So it is not surprising that ﬁre-arms manufacturers ﬁnd
classical mechanics entirely satisfactory.
2.3.5 Generalisation to three dimensions
Real particles move in three dimensions rather than one. Fortunately, the
generalisation to three dimensions of what we have done in one dimension is
straightforward.
The x, y and z coordinates of a particle are three distinct observables.
Their operators commute with one another:
[ˆxi, ˆxj] = 0.
(2.73)
Since these are commuting observables, there is a complete set of mutual
eigenkets, {|x⟩}. We can express any state of the system, |ψ⟩, as a linear
combination of these kets:
|ψ⟩=
Z
d3x ⟨x|ψ⟩|x⟩=
Z
d3x ψ(x) |x⟩,
(2.74)


32
Chapter 2: Operators, measurement and time evolution
where the wavefunction ψ(x) is now a function of three variables, and the
integral is over all space.
The x, y and z components of the particle’s momentum ˆp commute with
one another:
[ˆpi, ˆpj] = 0.
(2.75)
In the position representation, these operators are represented by partial
derivatives with respect to their respective coordinates
ˆpi = −i¯h ∂
∂xi
so
ˆp = −i¯h∇.
(2.76)
The momenta commute with all operators except their conjugate coordinate,
so the canonical commutation relations are
[ˆxi, ˆpj] = i¯hδij.
(2.77)
In §4.2 we will understand the origin of the factor δij. Since the three mo-
mentum operators commute with one another, there is a complete set of
mutual eigenstates. Analogously to equation (2.61), the wavefunction of the
state with well deﬁned momentum p is
⟨x|p⟩=
1
h3/2 eix·p/¯h.
(2.78)
In the position representation the tdse of a particle of mass m that
moves in a potential V (x) reads
i¯h∂⟨x|ψ⟩
∂t
= ⟨x| ˆH|ψ⟩= ⟨x| ˆp2
2m|ψ⟩+ ⟨x|V (ˆx)|ψ⟩.
(2.79)
Now ⟨x|ˆp2|ψ⟩= −¯h2∇2⟨x|ψ⟩and ⟨x|V (ˆx)|ψ⟩= V (x)⟨x|ψ⟩. Hence using the
deﬁnition ψ(x) ≡⟨x|ψ⟩, the tdse becomes
i¯h∂ψ
∂t = −¯h2
2m∇2ψ + V (x)ψ.
(2.80)
Probability current
Max Born9 ﬁrst suggested that the mod-square of
a particle’s wavefunction,
ρ(x, t) ≡|ψ(x, t)|2
(2.81)
is the probability density of ﬁnding the particle near x at time t.
Since
the particle is certain to be found somewhere, this interpretation implies
that at any time
R
d3x |ψ(x, t)|2 = 1. It is not self-evident that this physical
requirement is satisﬁed when the wavefunction evolves according to the tdse
(2.80). We now show that it is in fact satisﬁed.
We multiple the tdse (2.80) by ψ∗and subtract from it the result of
multiplying the complex conjugate of (2.80) by ψ. Then the terms involving
the potential V (x) cancel and we are left with
i¯h

ψ∗∂ψ
∂t + ψ ∂ψ∗
∂t

= −¯h2
2m
 ψ∗∇2ψ −ψ∇2ψ∗
.
(2.82)
The left side of this equation is a multiple of the time derivative of ρ =
ψ∗ψ. The right side can be expressed as a multiple of the divergence of the
probability current
J(x) ≡i¯h
2m

ψ∇ψ∗−ψ∗∇ψ

.
(2.83)
9 For this insight Born won the 1954 Nobel Price for physics. In fact the text of the
key paper (Born, M., Z. Physik, 37 863 (1926)) argues that ψ is the probability density,
but a note in proof says “On more careful consideration, the probability is proportional
to the square of ψ”.


2.3 Position representation
33
That is, equation (2.82) can be written
∂ρ
∂t = −∇· J.
(2.84)
In ﬂuid mechanics this equation with J = ρv expresses the conservation of
mass as a ﬂuid of density ρ ﬂows with velocity v(x). In quantum mechanics
it expresses conservation of probability. To show that this is so, we simply
integrate both sides of equation (2.84) through a volume V. Then we obtain
d
dt
Z
V
d3x ρ =
Z
V
d3x ∂ρ
∂t = −
Z
V
d3x ∇· J = −
I
∂V
d2S · J,
(2.85)
where the last equality uses the divergence theorem and ∂V denotes the
boundary of V. Equation (2.85) states that the rate of increase of the proba-
bility P =
R
V d3x ρ of ﬁnding the particle in V is equal to minus the integral
over the volume’s bounding surface of the probability ﬂux out of the volume.
If V encompasses all space, ψ, and therefore J, will vanish on the boundary,
so
R
V d3x ρ will be constant.
We can gain valuable insight into the meaning of a wavefunction by
explicitly breaking ψ into its modulus and phase:
ψ(x) = S(x)eiφ(x),
(2.86)
where S and φ are real. Substituting this expression into the deﬁnition (2.83)
of J, we ﬁnd
J = i¯h
2m(S∇S −iS2∇φ −S∇S −iS2∇φ) = ¯h
mS2∇φ.
(2.87)
Since S2 = |ψ|2 = ρ, the velocity v that is deﬁned by setting J = ρv is
v = ¯h∇φ
m .
(2.88)
Thus the gradient of the phase of the wavefunction encodes the velocity at
which the probability ﬂuid ﬂows. In classical physics, this is the particle’s
velocity. The phase of the wavefunction (2.78) of a particle of well-deﬁned
momentum is φ(x) = x · p/¯h, so in this special case v = p/m as in classical
physics. Equation (2.88) extends the connection between velocity and the
gradient of phase to general wavefunctions.
The virial theorem
We illustrate the use of the canonical commutations
relations equations (2.73), (2.75) and (2.77) by deriving a relation between
the kinetic and potential energies of a particle that is in a stationary state.
In §2.2.1 we showed that all expectation values are time-independent when
a system is in a stationary state. We apply this result to the operator ˆx · ˆp
0 = i¯h d
dt ⟨ˆx · ˆp⟩= ⟨E|
h
ˆx · ˆp, ˆp2
2m + V (ˆx)
i
|E⟩
=
1
2m⟨E|[ˆx · ˆp, ˆp2]|E⟩+ ⟨E|[ˆx · ˆp, V (ˆx)]|E⟩.
(2.89)
The ﬁrst commutator can be expanded thus
[ˆx · ˆp, ˆp2] =
X
jk
[ˆxj ˆpj, ˆp2
k] =
X
jk
[ˆxj, ˆp2
k]ˆpj =
X
jk
2i¯hˆpkδjk ˆpj = 2i¯hˆp2.
(2.90)
In the position representation the second commutator is simply
[ˆx · ˆp, V (ˆx)] = −i¯hx · ∇V (x).
(2.91)


34
Problems
When we put these results back into (2.89) and rearrange, we obtain the
virial theorem
2⟨E| ˆp2
2m|E⟩= ⟨E|(x · ∇V )|E⟩.
(2.92)
In important applications the potential is proportional to some power of
distance from the origin: V (x) = C|x|α. Then, because ∇|x| = x/|x|, the
operator on the right is x · ∇V = αC|x|α = αV and the virial theorem
becomes
2⟨E| ˆp2
2m|E⟩= α⟨E|V |E⟩.
(2.93)
So twice the kinetic energy is equal to α times the potential energy. For
example, for a harmonic oscillator α = 2, so kinetic and potential energies
are equal. The other important example is motion in an inverse-square force
ﬁeld, such as the electrostatic ﬁeld of an atomic nucleus. In this case α = −1,
so twice the kinetic energy plus the potential energy vanishes. Equivalently,
the kinetic energy is equal in magnitude but opposite in sign to the total
energy.
Problems
2.1
How is a wave-function ψ(x) written in Dirac’s notation? What’s the
physical signiﬁcance of the complex number ψ(x) for given x?
2.2
Let Q be an operator. Under what circumstances is the complex num-
ber ⟨a|Q|b⟩equal to the complex number (⟨b|Q|a⟩)∗for any states |a⟩and
|b⟩?
2.3
Let Q be the operator of an observable and let |ψ⟩be the state of our
system.
a. What are the physical interpretations of ⟨ψ|Q|ψ⟩and |⟨qn|ψ⟩|2, where
|qn⟩is the nth eigenket of the observable Q and qn is the corresponding
eigenvalue?
b. What is the operator P
n |qn⟩⟨qn|, where the sum is over all eigenkets
of Q? What is the operator P
n qn|qn⟩⟨qn|?
c. If un(x) is the wavefunction of the state |qn⟩, write dow an integral that
evaluates to ⟨qn|ψ⟩.
2.4
What does it mean to say that two operators commute? What is the
signiﬁcance of two observables having mutually commuting operators?
Given that the commutator [P, Q]̸ = 0 for some observables P and Q,
does it follow that for all |ψ⟩̸ = 0 we have [P, Q]|ψ⟩̸ = 0?
2.5
Let ψ(x, t) be the correctly normalised wavefunction of a particle of
mass m and potential energy V (x). Write down expressions for the expec-
tation values of (a) x; (b) x2; (c) the momentum px; (d) p2
x; (e) the energy.
What is the probability that the particle will be found in the interval
(x1, x2)?
2.6
Write down the time-independent (tise) and the time-dependent (tdse)
Schr¨odinger equations. Is it necessary for the wavefunction of a system to
satisfy the tdse?
Under what circumstances does the wavefunction of a
system satisfy the tise?
2.7
Why is the tdse ﬁrst-order in time, rather than second-order like New-
ton’s equations of motion?
2.8
A particle is conﬁned in a potential well such that its allowed energies
are En = n2E, where n = 1, 2, . . . is an integer and E a positive constant.
The corresponding energy eigenstates are |1⟩, |2⟩, . . . , |n⟩, . . .. At t = 0 the
particle is in the state
|ψ(0)⟩= 0.2|1⟩+ 0.3|2⟩+ 0.4|3⟩+ 0.843|4⟩.
(2.94)


Problems
35
a. What is the probability, if the energy is measured at t = 0 of ﬁnding a
number smaller than 6E?
b. What is the mean value and what is the rms deviation of the energy of
the particle in the state |ψ(0)⟩?
c. Calculate the state vector |ψ⟩at time t. Do the results found in (a) and
(b) for time t remain valid for arbitrary time t?
d. When the energy is measured it turns out to be 16E. After the mea-
surement, what is the state of the system? What result is obtained if
the energy is measured again?
2.9
A system has a time-independent Hamiltonian that has spectrum {En}.
Prove that the probability Pk that a measurement of energy will yield the
value Ek is is time-independent. Hint: you can do this either from Ehrenfest’s
theorem, or by diﬀerentiating ⟨Ek, t|ψ⟩w.r.t. t and using the tdse.
2.10
Let ψ(x) be a properly normalised wavefunction and Q an opera-
tor on wavefunctions. Let {qr} be the spectrum of Q and {ur(x)} be the
corresponding correctly normalised eigenfunctions. Write down an expres-
sion for the probability that a measurement of Q will yield the value qr.
Show that P
r P(qr|ψ) = 1.
Show further that the expectation of Q is
⟨Q⟩≡
R ∞
−∞ψ∗ˆQψ dx.10
2.11
Find the energy of neutron, electron and electromagnetic waves of
wavelength 0.1 nm.
2.12
Neutrons are emitted from an atomic pile with a Maxwellian distribu-
tion of velocities for temperature 400 K. Find the most probable de Broglie
wavelength in the beam.
2.13
A beam of neutrons with energy E runs horizontally into a crystal.
The crystal transmits half the neutrons and deﬂects the other half vertically
upwards. After climbing to height H these neutrons are deﬂected through 90◦
onto a horizontal path parallel to the originally transmitted beam. The two
horizontal beams now move a distance L down the laboratory, one distance H
above the other. After going distance L, the lower beam is deﬂected vertically
upwards and is ﬁnally deﬂected into the path of the upper beam such that
the two beams are co-spatial as they enter the detector. Given that particles
in both the lower and upper beams are in states of well-deﬁned momentum,
show that the wavenumbers k, k′ of the lower and upper beams are related
by
k′ ≃k

1 −mngH
2E

.
(2.95)
In an actual experiment (R. Colella et al., 1975, Phys. Rev. Let., 34, 1472)
E = 0.042 eV and LH ∼10−3 m2 (the actual geometry was slightly diﬀer-
ent). Determine the phase diﬀerence between the two beams at the detector.
Sketch the intensity in the detector as a function of H.
2.14
A particle moves in the potential V (x) and is known to have energy
En. (a) Can it have well deﬁned momentum for some particular V (x)? (b)
Can the particle simultaneously have well-deﬁned energy and position?
2.15
The states {|1⟩, |2⟩} form a complete orthonormal set of states for a
two-state system. With respect to these basis states the operator σy has
matrix
σy =

0
−i
i
0

.
(2.96)
Could σ be an observable? What are its eigenvalues and eigenvectors in the
{|1⟩, |2⟩} basis? Determine the result of operating with σy on the state
|ψ⟩=
1
√2(|1⟩−|2⟩).
(2.97)
10 In the most elegant formulation of qantum mechanics, this last result is the basic
postulate of the theory, and one derives other rules for the physical interpretation of the qn,
an etc. from it – see J. von Neumann, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics.


36
Problems
2.16
A three-state system has a complete orthonormal set of states |1⟩, |2⟩, |3⟩.
With respect to this basis the operators H and B have matrices
H = ¯hω


1
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0
−1


B = b


1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0

,
(2.98)
where ω and b are real constants.
a. Are H and B Hermitian?
b. Write down the eigenvalues of H and ﬁnd the eigenvalues of B. Solve for
the eigenvectors of both H and B. Explain why neither matrix uniquely
speciﬁes its eigenvectors.
c. Show that H and B commute. Give a basis of eigenvectors common to
H and B.
2.17
Given that A and B are Hermitian operators, show that i[A, B] is a
Hermitian operator.
2.18
Given a ordinary function f(x) and an operator R, the operator f(R)
is deﬁned to be
f(R) =
X
i
f(ri)|ri⟩⟨ri|,
(2.99)
where ri are the eigenvalues of R and |ri⟩are the associated eigenkets. Show
that when f(x) = x2 this deﬁnition implies that f(R) = RR, that is, that
operating with f(R) is equivalent to applying the operator R twice. What
bearing does this result have in the meaning of eR?
2.19
Show that if there is a complete set of mutual eigenkets of the Hermi-
tian operators A and B, then [A, B] = 0. Explain the physical signiﬁcance
of this result.
2.20
Given that for any two operators (AB)† = B†A†, show that
(ABCD)† = D†C†B†A†.
(2.100)
2.21
Prove for any four operators A, B, C, D that
[ABC, D] = AB[C, D] + A[B, D]C + [A, D]BC.
(2.101)
Explain the similarity with the rule for diﬀerentiating a product.
2.22
Show that for any three operators A, B and C, the Jacobi identity
holds:
[A, [B, C]] + [B, [C, A]] + [C, [A, B]] = 0.
(2.102)
2.23
Show that a classical harmonic oscillator satisﬁes the virial equation
2⟨KE⟩= α⟨PE⟩and determine the relevant value of α.
2.24
Given that the wavefunction is ψ = Aei(kz−ωt) + Be−i(kz+ωt), where
A and B are constants, show that the probability current density is
J = v
 |A|2 −|B|2 ˆz,
(2.103)
where v = ¯hk/m. Interpret the result physically.


3
Harmonic oscillators and magnetic
ﬁelds
Harmonic oscillators are of enormous importance for physics because most
of condensed-matter physics and quantum electrodynamics centre on weakly
perturbed harmonic oscillators. The reason harmonic oscillators are so com-
mon is simple.
The points of equilibrium of a particle that moves in a
potential V (x) are points at which the force −dV/dx vanishes. When we
place the origin of x at such a point, the Maclaurin expansion of V becomes
V (x) = constant + 1
2V ′′x2 + O(x3), and the force on the particle becomes
F = −V ′′x + O(x2). Consequently, for suﬃciently small excursions from the
point of equilibrium, the particle’s motion will be well approximated by a
harmonic oscillator.
Besides providing the background to a great many branches of physics,
our analysis of a harmonic oscillator will introduce a technique that we will
use twice more in our analysis of the hydrogen atom. As a bonus, we will ﬁnd
that our results for the harmonic oscillator enable us to solve another impor-
tant, and apparently unrelated problem: the motion of a charged particle in
a uniform magnetic ﬁeld.
3.1 Stationary states of a harmonic oscillator
We can build a harmonic oscillator by placing a particle in a potential that
increases quadratically with distance from the origin. Hence an appropriate
Hamiltonian is given by equation (2.51) with V ∝x2.1 For later convenience
we choose the constant of proportionality such that H becomes
H =
1
2m

p2 + (mωx)2	
.
(3.1)
In §2.2 we saw that the dynamical evolution of a system follows immediately
once we know the eigenvalues and eigenkets of H. So we now determine
these quantities for the Hamiltonian (3.1).
1 In the last chapter we distinguished the position and momentum operators from their
eigenvalues with hats. Henceforth we drop the hats; the distinction between operator and
eigenvalue should be clear from the context.


38
Chapter 3: Harmonic oscillators and magnetic ﬁelds
We next introduce the dimensionless operator
A ≡mωx + ip
√
2m¯hω
.
(3.2a)
This operator isn’t Hermitian. Bearing in mind that x and p are Hermitian,
from the rules in Table 2.1 we see that its adjoint is
A† = mωx −ip
√
2m¯hω
.
(3.2b)
The product A†A is
A†A =
1
2m¯hω (mωx −ip)(mωx + ip)
=
1
2m¯hω

(mωx)2 + imω[x, p] + p2	
= H
¯hω −1
2,
(3.3)
where we have used the canonical commutation relation (2.54). This equation
can be rewritten H/(¯hω) = A†A+ 1
2, so A is rather nearly the square root of
the dimensionless Hamiltonian H/¯hω. If we calculate AA† in the same way,
the only thing that changes is the sign in front of the commutator [x, p], so
we have
AA† = H
¯hω + 1
2.
(3.4)
Subtracting equation (3.4) from equation (3.3) we ﬁnd that
[A†, A] = −1.
(3.5)
We will ﬁnd it useful to have evaluated the commutator of A† with the
Hamiltonian. Since from equation (3.3) H = ¯hω(A†A + 1
2), we can write
[A†, H] = ¯hω[A†, A†A] = ¯hωA†[A†, A] = −¯hωA†,
(3.6)
where we have exploited the rules of equations (2.22).
We now multiply both sides of the deﬁning relation of |En⟩, namely
H|En⟩= En|En⟩, by A†:
A†En|En⟩= A†H|En⟩=
 HA† + [A†, H]

|En⟩= (H −¯hω)A†|En⟩.
(3.7)
A slight rearrangement of this equation yields
H(A†|En⟩) = (En + ¯hω)(A†|En⟩).
(3.8)
Provided |b⟩≡A†|En⟩has non-zero length-squared, this shows that |b⟩is an
eigenket of H with eigenvalue En + ¯hω. The length-square of |b⟩is
A†|En⟩
2 = ⟨En|AA†|En⟩= ⟨En|
 H
¯hω + 1
2

|En⟩= En
¯hω + 1
2.
(3.9)
Now squeezing H between ⟨En| and |En⟩we ﬁnd with (3.1) that
En = ⟨En|H|En⟩=
1
2mω
 p|En⟩
2 + m2ω2x|En⟩
2
≥0.
(3.10)
Thus the energy eigenvalues are non-negative, so
A†|En⟩
2 > 0 and by
repeated application of A† we can construct an inﬁnite series of eigenstates
with energy En + k¯hω for k = 0, 1, . . .
Similarly, we can show that provided A|En⟩has non-zero length-squared,
it is an eigenket of H for energy En −¯hω. Since we know that all eigenvalues


3.1 Stationary states
39
are non-negative, for some energy E0, A|E0⟩must vanish. Equating to zero
the length-squared of this vector we obtain an equation for E0:
0 =
A|E0⟩
2 = ⟨E0|
 H
¯hω −1
2

|E0⟩= E0
¯hω −1
2.
(3.11)
So E0 = 1
2¯hω and we have established that the eigenvalues of H are
¯hω × ( 1
2, 3
2, . . . , 2r+1
2
, . . .)
that is
Er = (r + 1
2)¯hω.
(3.12)
The operators A† and A with which we have obtained these important
results are respectively called creation and annihilation operators be-
cause the ﬁrst creates an excitation of the oscillator, and the second destroys
one. In quantum ﬁeld theory particles are interpreted as excitations of the
vacuum and each particle species is associated with creation and annihilation
operators that create and destroy particles of the given species. A and A†
are also called ladder operators.
We now examine the eigenkets of H. Let |r⟩denote the state of energy
(r + 1
2)¯hω. In this notation the lowest-energy state, or ground state, is |0⟩
and its deﬁning equation is A|0⟩= 0. From equation (3.2a) this equation
reads
0 = A|0⟩= mωx|0⟩+ ip|0⟩
√
2m¯hω
.
(3.13)
We now go to the position representation by multiplying through by ⟨x|.
With equations (2.48) and (2.49) we ﬁnd that the equation becomes
1
√
2m¯hω

mωx + ¯h ∂
∂x

⟨x|0⟩= 0.
(3.14)
This is a linear, ﬁrst-order diﬀerential equation.
Its integrating factor is
exp(mωx2/2¯h), so the correctly normalised wavefunction is
⟨x|0⟩=
1
(2πℓ2)1/4 e−x2/4ℓ2,
where
ℓ≡
r
¯h
2mω.
(3.15)
Notice that this solution is unique, so the ground state is non-degenerate.
It is a Gaussian function, so the probability distribution P(x) = |⟨x|0⟩|2 for
the position of the particle that forms the oscillator is also a Gaussian: its
dispersion is ℓ.
From equations (2.63) and (2.64) we see that the momentum distribution
of the wavefunction (3.15) is
P(p) ≡|⟨p|0⟩|2 ∝e−2ℓ2p2/¯h2,
(3.16)
which is a Gaussian with dispersion σp = ¯h/2ℓ. By inserting x = ℓand
p = σp in the Hamiltonian (3.1) we obtain estimates of the typical kinetic
and potential energies of the particle when it’s in its ground state. We ﬁnd
that both energies are ∼1
4¯hω. In fact one can straightforwardly show that
H(ℓ, σp) is minimised subject to the constraint ℓσp ≥¯h/2 when ℓand σp
take the values that we have derived for the ground state (Problem 3.4). In
other words, in its ground state the particle is as stationary and as close to
the origin as the uncertainty principle permits; there is a conﬂict between the
advantage energetically of being near the origin, and the energetic penalty
that the uncertainty principle exacts for having a well deﬁned position.
Every system that has a conﬁning potential exhibits an analogous zero-
point motion.
The energy tied up in this motion is called zero-point
energy. Zero-point motion is probably the single most important prediction
of quantum mechanics, for the material world is at every level profoundly
inﬂuenced by this phenomenon.


40
Chapter 3: Harmonic oscillators and magnetic ﬁelds
We obtain the wavefunctions of excited states by applying powers of
the diﬀerential operator A† to ⟨x|0⟩. Equation (3.9) enables us to ﬁnd the
normalisation constant α in the equation |n + 1⟩= αA†|n⟩; it implies that
α2 = n+1. the generalisation of equation (3.11) enables us to determine the
number β in the equation |n −1⟩= βA|n⟩, and we have ﬁnally
|n + 1⟩=
1
√n + 1A†|n⟩
;
|n −1⟩=
1
√nA|n⟩.
(3.17)
It is useful to remember that the normalisation constant is always the square
root of the largest value of n appearing in the equation. As a speciﬁc example
⟨x|1⟩=
1
√
2m¯hω

mωx −¯h ∂
∂x

⟨x|0⟩=
 x
2ℓ−ℓ∂
∂x

⟨x|0⟩
=
1
(2πℓ2)1/4
x
ℓe−x2/4ℓ2.
(3.18)
Whereas the ground-state wavefunction is an even function of x, the wave-
function of the ﬁrst excited state is an odd function because A† is odd in x.
Wavefunctions that are even in x are said to be of even parity, while those
that are odd functions have odd parity. It is clear that this pattern will
be repeated as we apply further powers of A† to generate the other states
of well-deﬁned energy, so ⟨x|n⟩is even parity if n is even, and odd parity
otherwise.
Notice that the operator N ≡A†A is Hermitian. By equations (3.17)
N|n⟩= n|n⟩, so its eigenvalue tells you the number of excitations the oscil-
lator has. Hence N is called the number operator.
Let’s use these results to ﬁnd the mean-square displacement ⟨n|x2|n⟩
when the oscillator is in its nth excited state. Adding equations (3.2) we
express x as a linear combination of A and A†
x =
r
¯h
2mω(A + A†) = ℓ(A + A†),
(3.19)
where ℓis deﬁned by (3.15), so
⟨n|x2|n⟩= ℓ2⟨n|(A + A†)2|n⟩.
(3.20)
When we multiply out the bracket on the right, the only terms that con-
tribute are the ones that involve equal numbers of As and A†s. Thus
⟨n|x2|n⟩= ℓ2⟨n|(AA† + A†A)|n⟩= ℓ2(2n + 1) = ℓ2 2En
¯hω ,
(3.21)
where we have used equations (3.17) and (3.12). If we use equation (3.15) to
eliminate ℓ, we obtain a formula that is valid in classical mechanics (Prob-
lem 2.23).


3.2 Dynamics of oscillators
41
3.2 Dynamics of oscillators
By equations (2.29) and (3.12), the nth excited state of the harmonic oscil-
lator evolves in time according to
|n, t⟩= e−i(n+1/2)ωt|n, 0⟩
(3.22)
Consequently, no state oscillates at the oscillator’s classical frequency ω. How
do we reconcile this result with classical physics?
We have seen that we make the link from quantum to classical physics
by considering the expectation values of observables – if classical physics
applies, the measured value of any observable will lie close to the expectation
value, so the latter provides an accurate description of what’s happening.
Equation (2.35) tells us that when a system is in an energy eigenstate, the
expectation value of any time-independent observable Q cannot depend on
time. Equation (3.22) enables us to obtain this result from a diﬀerent point of
view by showing that when we form the expectation value ⟨Q⟩= ⟨ψ|Q|ψ⟩, the
factor e−iEnt/¯h in the ket |ψ, t⟩= e−iEnt/¯h|En⟩cancels on the corresponding
factor in ⟨ψ, t|.
Hence energy eigenstates are incapable of motion.2
The
system is capable of motion only if there are non-negligible amplitudes to
measure more than one possible energy, or, equivalently, if none of the ai in
the sum (2.32) has near unit modulus.
Consideration of the motion of a harmonic oscillator will make this gen-
eral point clearer. If the oscillator’s state is written
|ψ, t⟩=
X
aj e−iEjt/¯h|j⟩,
(3.23)
then the expectation value of x is
⟨x⟩=
X
jk
a∗
kajei(Ek−Ej)t/¯h⟨k|x|j⟩=
X
jk
a∗
kajei(k−j)ωt⟨k|x|j⟩.
(3.24)
We simplify this expression by using equation (3.19) to replace x with ℓ(A +
A†) and then using (3.17) to evaluate the matrix elements of A and A†:
⟨x⟩= ℓ
X
jk
a∗
kajei(k−j)ωt⟨k|(A + A†)|j⟩
= ℓ
X
jk
a∗
kajei(k−j)ωt p
j⟨k|j −1⟩+
p
j + 1⟨k|j + 1⟩.
(3.25)
Since ⟨k|j −1⟩vanishes unless k = j −1, it’s now easy to perform the sum
over k, leaving two terms to be summed over j. On account of the factor
√j we can restrict the ﬁrst of these sums to j > 0, and in the second sum
we replace j by j′ ≡j + 1 and then replace the symbol j′ by j so we can
combine the two sums. After these operations we have
⟨x⟩= ℓ
X
j=1
p
j(a∗
j−1aje−iωt + a∗
jaj−1eiωt)
=
X
j
Xj cos(ωt + φj),
(3.26a)
where the real numbers Xj and φj are deﬁned by
2
p
jℓa∗
jaj−1 = Xjeiφj.
(3.26b)
Thus ⟨x⟩oscillates sinusoidally at the classical frequency ω regardless of the
amplitudes aj. Thus we have recovered the classical result that the frequency
2 If we consider that t is the variable canonically conjugate to energy, this fact becomes
a manifestation of the uncertainty principle.


42
Chapter 3: Harmonic oscillators and magnetic ﬁelds
Figure 3.1 The potential energy V (x) of an anharmonic oscillator (full curve) and V (x)
for the harmonic oscillator obtained by restricting the potential to the ﬁrst two terms in
its Maclaurin expansion (dashed curve).
at which a harmonic oscillator oscillates is independent of amplitude and
equal to
p
k/m, where k is the oscillator’s spring constant.
In the classical regime, the only non-negligible amplitudes aj have in-
dices j that cluster around some large number n. Consequently, a measure-
ment of the energy is guaranteed to yield a value that lies close to E = En,
and from equation (3.21) it follows that the mean value of x2 will lie close
to x2 = 2ℓ2En/(¯hω). Classically, the time average of x2 is proportional to
the average potential energy, which is just half the total energy. Hence, av-
eraging the Hamiltonian (3.1) we conclude that classically x2 = E/(mω2),
in precise agrees with the quantum-mechanical result. The correspondence
principle requires the classical and quantum-mechanical values of x2 to agree
for large n. That they agree even for small n is a coincidence.
3.2.1 Anharmonic oscillators
The Taylor series of the potential energy V (x) of a harmonic oscillator is
very special: it contains precisely one non-trivial term, that proportional to
x2. Real oscillators have potential-energy functions that invariably deviate
from this ideal to some degree. The deviation is generally in the sense that
V (x) < 1
2V ′′(0)x2 for x > 0 – see Figure 3.1. One reason why deviations from
harmonicity are generally of this type is that it takes only a ﬁnite amount of
energy to break a real object, so V (∞) should be ﬁnite, whereas the potential
energy function of a harmonic oscillator increases without limit as x →∞.
Consider the anharmonic oscillator that has potential energy
V (x) = −a2V0
a2 + x2 ,
(3.27)
where V0 and a are constants. We cannot ﬁnd the stationary states of this
oscillator analytically any more than we can analytically solve its classical
equations of motion.3
But we can determine its quantum mechanics nu-
merically,4 and doing so will help to show which aspects of the results we
3 Murphy’s law is in action here: the dynamics of the pendulum is analytically in-
tractable precisely because it is richer and more interesting than that of the harmonic
oscillator.
4 A good way to do this is to turn the tise into a ﬁnite matrix equation and then to
use a numerical linear-algebra package to ﬁnd the eigenvalues of the matrix. Figure 3.2
was obtained using the approximation ψ′′
n ≃(ψn+1 + ψn−1 −2ψn)/∆2, where ψn denotes
ψ(n∆) with ∆a small increment in x. With this approximation the tise becomes the
eigenvalue equation of a tridiagonal matrix that has 2b2/∆2 + Vn/V0 on the leading diag-
onal and −b2/∆2 above and below this diagonal, where b2 = ¯h2/2mV0 and Vn = V (n∆).


3.2 Dynamics of oscillators
43
Figure 3.2 The spectrum of the
anharmonic oscillator for which the
potential is plotted in Figure 3.1
when the dimensionless variable
2ma2V0/¯h2 = 100.
Figure 3.3 Values of aj when there is signiﬁcant uncertainty in E.
have obtained for the harmonic oscillator are special, and which have general
applicability.
Figure 3.2 shows the anharmonic oscillator’s energy spectrum. At low
energies, when the pendulum is nearly harmonic, the energies are nearly
uniformly spaced in E. As we proceed to higher energies, the spacing between
levels diminishes, with the consequence that inﬁnitely many energy levels are
packed into the ﬁnite energy range between −V0 and zero, where the particle
becomes free. This crowding of the energy levels has the following implication
for the time dependence of ⟨x⟩. Suppose there are just two energies with non-
zero amplitudes, aN and aN+1. Then ⟨x⟩will be given by
⟨x⟩= a∗
NaN+1ei(EN−EN+1)t/¯h⟨N|x|N + 1⟩+ complex conjugate.
(3.28)
This is a sinusoidal function of time, but its period, T = h/(EN+1 −EN),
depends on N. If we increase the energy and amplitude of the oscillator, we
will increase N and Figure 3.2 shows that T will also increase. Classically
the period of the oscillator increases with amplitude in just the same way.
Thus there is an intimate connection between the spacing of the energy levels
and classical dynamics.
Consider now the case in which the energy is more uncertain, so that
several of the aj are non-zero, and let these non-zero aj be clustered around


44
Chapter 3: Harmonic oscillators and magnetic ﬁelds
j = N (see Figure 3.3). In this case several terms will occur in the sum for
⟨x⟩
⟨x⟩= · · · + a∗
N−1aNei(EN−1−EN)t/¯h⟨N −1|x|N⟩
+ a∗
N+1aNei(EN+1−EN)t/¯h⟨N + 1|x|N⟩
+ a∗
N+3aNei(EN+3−EN)t/¯h⟨N + 3|x|N⟩+ · · ·
(3.29)
where we have anticipated a result of §4.1.4 below that the matrix element
⟨j|x|k⟩vanishes if j −k is even. The sum (3.29) diﬀers from the correspond-
ing one (3.26a) for a harmonic oscillator in the presence of matrix elements
⟨j|x|k⟩with |j −k| > 1: in the case of the harmonic oscillator these ma-
trix elements vanish, but in the general case they won’t. In consequence
the series contains terms with frequencies (EN+3 −EN)/¯h as well as terms
in ωN ≡(EN+1 −EN)/¯h. If these additional frequencies were all integer
multiples of a single frequency ωN, the time dependence of ⟨x⟩would be
periodic with period TN = 2π/ωN, but anharmonic, like that of the classical
oscillator. Now (EN+3 −EN)/¯h ≃3ωN because the spacing between energy
levels changes only slowly with N, so when, as in Figure 3.3, the non-zero
amplitudes are very tightly clustered around N, the additional frequencies
will be integer multiples of ωN to good accuracy, and the motion will indeed
be periodic but anharmonic as classical mechanics predicts.
If we release the oscillator from near some large extension X, the non-
negligible amplitudes aj will be clustered around some integer N as depicted
in Figure 3.3, and their phases will be such that at t = 0 the wavefunctions
⟨x|j⟩will interfere constructively near X and sum to near zero elsewhere,
ensuring that the mod-square of the wavefunction ψ(x, 0) = P
j aj⟨x|j⟩is
sharply peaked around x = X. At a general time the wavefunction will be
given by
ψ(x, t) = e−iENt/¯h X
j
ei(EN−Ej)t/¯haj⟨x|j⟩.
(3.30)
Since the spacing of the energy levels varies with index j, the frequencies in
this sum will not be precisely equal to integer multiples of ωN = (EN+1 −
EN)/¯h, so after an approximate period TN = 2π/ωN most terms in the
series will not have quite returned to their values at t = 0. Consequently,
the constructive interference around x = X will be less sharply peaked than
it was at t = 0, and the cancellation elsewhere will be correspondingly less
complete. After each further approximate period TN, the failure of terms in
the series to return to their original values will be more marked, and the peak
in |ψ(x, t)|2 will be wider. After a long time t ≫TN the instants at which
individual terms next return to their original values will be pretty uniformly
distributed around an interval in t of length TN, and |ψ(x, t)|2 will cease to
evolve very much: it will have become a smooth function throughout the
range |x| ∼< X.
This behaviour makes perfectly good sense classically. The uncertainty
in E that enables the wavefunction to be highly localised at t = 0 corre-
sponds in the classical picture to uncertainty in the initial displacement X.
Since the period of an anharmonic oscillator is a function of the oscillator’s
energy, uncertainty in X implies uncertainty in the oscillator’s period. After
a long time even a small uncertainty in the period translates into a signiﬁcant
uncertainty in the oscillator’s phase. Hence after a long time the probability
distribution for the particle’s position is fairly uniformly distributed within
|x| ≤X even in the classical case.


3.3 Motion in a magnetic ﬁeld
45
3.3 Motion in a magnetic ﬁeld
The formalism we developed for a harmonic oscillator enables us to solve an
important, and you might have thought unconnected, problem: the motion
of a particle of mass m and charge Q in a uniform magnetic ﬁeld of ﬂux
density B.
The ﬁrst question to address when setting up the quantum-mechanical
theory of a system is, “what’s the Hamiltonian?” because it is the Hamil-
tonian that encodes mathematically how the system works, including what
forces are acting. So we have to decide what the Hamiltonian should be for
a particle of charge Q and mass m that moves in a magnetic ﬁeld B(x). The
answer proves to be
H =
1
2m(p −QA)2,
(3.31)
where A is the vector potential that generates B through B = ∇× A. The
most persuasive theoretical motivation of this Hamiltonian involves relativity
and lies beyond the scope of this book. However, since we are exploring a new
and deeper level of physical theory, we can ultimately only proceed by making
conjectures and then confronting the resulting predictions with experimental
measurements. In this spirit we adopt equation (3.31) as a conjecture from
which we can try to recover the known behaviour of a charged particle in
a magnetic ﬁeld.
In subsequent chapters we will show that this formula
accounts satisfactorily for features in the spectra of atoms. Hence we can be
pretty sure that it is correct.
Since we know the equations of motion of a classical particle in a ﬁeld B,
let’s investigate the classical limit in the usual way, by ﬁnding the equations
of motion of expectation values. With equation (2.34) we have that the rate
of change of the expectation value of the ith component of x is
i¯hd ⟨xi⟩
dt
= ⟨[xi, H]⟩=
1
2m

[xi, (p −QA)2]

.
(3.32)
The rules (2.22) and the canonical commutation relation [xi, pj] = i¯hδij
enable us to simplify the commutator
2mi¯hd ⟨xi⟩
dt
= ⟨[xi, (p −QA)] · (p −QA)⟩
+ ⟨(p −QA) · [xi, (p −QA)]⟩
= 2i¯h ⟨pi −QAi⟩,
(3.33)
where we have used the fact that x commutes with A because A is a function
of x only. Thus, with this Hamiltonian
⟨p⟩= md ⟨x⟩
dt
+ Q ⟨A⟩.
(3.34)
that is, the momentum is m ˙x plus an amount proportional to the vector
potential.
It is possible to show that the additional term represents the
momentum of the magnetic ﬁeld that arises because the charge Q is moving
(Problem 3.19).
In the classical limit we can neglect the diﬀerence between a variable and
its expectation value because all uncertainties are small. Then with (3.34)
the Hamiltonian (3.31) becomes just 1
2m ˙x2, which makes perfect sense since
we know that the Lorentz force Q ˙x × B does no work on a classical particle,
and the particle’s energy is just its kinetic energy.
To show that our proposed Hamiltonian generates the Lorentz force, we
evaluate the rate of change of ⟨p⟩:
i¯hd ⟨pi⟩
dt
= ⟨[pi, H]⟩=
1
2m

⟨[pi, (p −QA)] · (p −QA)⟩
+ ⟨(p −QA) · [pi, (p −QA)]⟩
	
.
(3.35)


46
Chapter 3: Harmonic oscillators and magnetic ﬁelds
We now use equation (2.25) to evaluate the commutator [pi, A] and conclude
that
d ⟨pi⟩
dt
= Q
2m
∂A
∂xi
· (p −QA)

+

(p −QA) · ∂A
∂xi

.
(3.36)
Notice that we cannot combine the two terms on the right of this equation
because p does not commute with A and its derivatives. In the classical
limit we can replace each operator by its expectation value, and then replace
⟨p −QA⟩by m ⟨˙x⟩. Similarly replacing the p on the left, we have in the
classical limit
md2xi
dt2 + QdAi
dt = Q∂A
∂xi
· ˙x,
(3.37)
where we have omitted the expectation value signs that ought to be around
every operator. The time derivative on the left is along the trajectory of the
particle (i.e., to be evaluated at ⟨x⟩t). If A has no explicit time dependence
because the ﬁeld B is static, its time derivative is just ˙x·∇Ai. We move this
term to the right side and have
md2xi
dt2 = Q

˙x · ∂A
∂xi
−˙x · ∇Ai,

= Q

˙x × (∇× A)
	
i.
(3.38)
Thus our proposed Hamiltonian (3.31) yields the Lorentz force in the classical
limit.
3.3.1 Gauge transformations
Any magnetic ﬁeld is Gauge invariant: A and A′ = A + ∇Λ generate
identical magnetic ﬁelds, where Λ(x) is any scalar function.
A potential
problem with the Hamiltonian (3.31) is that it changes in a non-trivial way
when we change gauge, which is worrying because H should embody the
physics, which is independent of gauge. We now show that this behaviour
gives rise to no physical diﬃculty providing we change the phases of all kets
at the same time that we change the gauge in which we write A. The idea
that a change of gauge in a ﬁeld such as A that mediates a force (in this
case the electromagnetic force) requires a compensating change in the ket
that is used to describe a given physical state, has enormously far-reaching
ramiﬁcations in ﬁeld theory.
Suppose ψ(x) = ⟨x|E⟩is an eigenfunction of the Hamiltonian for A:
(p −QA)2|ψ⟩= 2mE|ψ⟩.
(3.39)
Then we show that
φ(x) ≡eiQΛ/¯hψ(x)
(3.40)
is an eigenfunction of the Hamiltonian we get by replacing A with A′. We
start by noting that
p −QA′ = p −Q(A + ∇Λ) = (p −Q∇Λ) −QA
and that for any wavefunction χ(x)
eiQΛ/¯hpχ(x) = eiQΛ/¯h −i¯h∇χ(x)

= −i¯h∇
 eiQΛ/¯hχ

−Q∇Λ(eiQΛ/¯hχ)
= (p −Q∇Λ)
 eiQΛ/¯hχ(x)

.
(3.41)
We subtract QAeiQΛ/¯hχ from each side to obtain
eiQΛ/¯h(p −QA)χ(x) = (p −QA −Q∇Λ)
 eiQΛ/¯hχ(x)

,
(3.42)


3.3 Motion in a magnetic ﬁeld
47
and then apply this result to χ ≡(p −QA)ψ:
eiQΛ/¯h(p −QA)2ψ(x) = (p −QA −Q∇Λ)eiQΛ/¯h(p −QA)ψ(x)
= (p −QA −Q∇Λ)2 eiQΛ/¯hψ(x)

,
(3.43)
where the second equality uses (3.42) again, this time with χ put equal to
ψ. So if
Hψ =
1
2m(p −QA)2ψ = Eψ,
(3.44)
then
H′ eiQΛ/¯hψ

=
1
2m(p −QA −Q∇Λ)2 eiQΛ/¯hψ(x)

= E
 eiQΛ/¯hψ(x)

,
(3.45)
In words, we can convert an eigenfunction of the Hamiltonian (3.31) with A
to an eigenfunction of that Hamiltonian with A′ = A + ∇Λ by multiplying
it by eiQΛ/¯h. Notice that Λ is an arbitrary function of x, so multiplication
by eiQΛ/¯h makes an entirely non-trivial change to ψ(x).
Given that there is a one-to-one relation between the eigenfunctions of
H before and after we make a gauge transformation, it is clear that the
spectrum of energy levels must be unchanged by the gauge transformation.
What about expectation values? Since both kets and the Hamiltonian un-
dergo gauge transformations, we should be open to the possibility that other
operators do too. Let R′ be the gauge transform of the operator R. Then
the expectation value of R is gauge invariant if
⟨R⟩=
Z
d3x ψ∗(x)Rψ(x) =
Z
d3x ψ∗(x)e−iQΛ/¯hR′eiQΛ/¯hψ(x).
(3.46)
Clearly this condition is satisﬁed for R′ = R if R is a function of x only.
From our work above it is readily seen that if R depends on p, the equation
is satisﬁed if p only occurs through the combination (p −QA), as in the
Hamiltonian.5 We believe that in any physical situation this condition on
the occurrence of p will always be satisﬁed, so all expectation values are in
fact gauge-invariant.
3.3.2 Landau Levels
We now ﬁnd the stationary states of a spinless particle that moves in a
uniform magnetic ﬁeld. Let the z-axis be parallel to B and choose the gauge
in which A = 1
2B(−y, x, 0). Then from equation (3.31) we have
H =
1
2m
n px + 1
2QBy
2 +
 py −1
2QBx)2 + p2
z
o
= 1
2¯hω(π2
x + π2
y) + p2
z
2m,
(3.47a)
where ω = QB/m is the Larmor frequency and we have deﬁned the di-
mensionless operators6
πx ≡px + 1
2mωy
√
mω¯h
;
πy ≡py −1
2mωx
√
mω¯h
.
(3.47b)
H has broken into two parts. The term p2
z/2m is just the Hamiltonian of a
free particle in one dimension – in §2.3.3 we already studied motion governed
by this Hamiltonian. The part
Hxy ≡1
2¯hω(π2
x + π2
y)
(3.47c)
5 The principle that p and A only occur in the combination p −QA is known as the
principle of minimal coupling.
6 We are implicitly assuming that QB and therefore ω are positive. It is this assump-
tion that leads to the angular momentum of a gyrating particle never being positive – see
equation (3.58).


48
Chapter 3: Harmonic oscillators and magnetic ﬁelds
is essentially the Hamiltonian of a harmonic oscillator because it is the sum of
squares of two Hermitian operators that satisfy the canonical commutation
relation
[πx, πy] = 1
2¯h
 [y, py] −[px, x]

= i.
(3.48)
The ladder operators are
a =
1
√2(πx + iπy)
a† =
1
√2(πx −iπy)
⇒
[a, a†] = i[πy, πx] = 1,
(3.49)
and in terms of them Hxy is
Hxy = ¯hω(a†a + 1
2).
(3.50)
It follows that the energy levels are E = ¯hω( 1
2, 3
2, . . .). These discrete energy
levels for a charged particle in a uniform magnetic ﬁeld are known as Landau
levels.
If particles can move freely parallel to B (which may not be possible in
condensed-matter systems), the overall energy spectrum will be continuous
notwithstanding the existence of discrete Landau levels.
In the case of an electron the Larmor frequency is usually called the
cyclotron frequency. It evaluates to 176(B/1 T) GHz, so the spacing of
the energy levels is 1.16 × 10−4(B/1 T) eV. At room temperature electrons
have thermal energies of order 0.03 eV, so the discreteness of Landau levels
is usually experimentally signiﬁcant in the laboratory only if the system is
cooled to low temperatures and immersed in a strong magnetic ﬁeld. The
strongest magnetic ﬁelds known occur near neutron stars, where B ∼108 T
is not uncommon, and in these systems electrons moving from one Landau
level to the next emit or absorb hard X-ray photons.
To ﬁnd the wavefunction of a given Landau level, we write the ground
state’s deﬁning equation in the position representation
a|0⟩= 0
↔

¯h
 ∂
∂x + i ∂
∂y

+ 1
2mω(x + iy)

⟨x|0⟩= 0.
(3.51)
We transform to new coordinates u ≡x + iy, v ≡x −iy. The chain rule
yields7
∂
∂u = 1
2
 ∂
∂x −i ∂
∂y

;
∂
∂v = 1
2
 ∂
∂x + i ∂
∂y

,
(3.52)
so a and a† can be written
a = −i rB
√2
 ∂
∂v +
u
4r2
B

;
a† = −i rB
√2
 ∂
∂u −
v
4r2
B

,
(3.53a)
where
rB ≡
r
¯h
mω =
s
¯h
QB .
(3.53b)
Equation (3.51) now becomes
∂⟨x|0⟩
∂v
+
1
4r2
B
u⟨x|0⟩= 0.
(3.54)
7 Aﬁcianados of functions of a complex variable may ask what ∂/∂u can mean since the
partial derivative involves holding constant v, which appears to be the complex conjugate
of u. Use of u, v as independent coordinates requires permitting x, y to take on complex
values. If you are nervous of using this mathematical ﬁction to solve diﬀerential equations,
you should check that the wavefunction of equation (3.58) really is an eigenfunction of H.


3.3 Motion in a magnetic ﬁeld
49
Solving this ﬁrst-order linear o.d.e. we ﬁnd
⟨x|0⟩= g(u) e−uv/4r2
B
(3.55)
where g(u) is an arbitrary function. On account of the arbitrariness of g(u),
the ground state of motion in a magnetic ﬁeld is not unique. This situation
contrasts with the one we encountered when solving for the ground state of
a harmonic oscillator. We obtain the simplest ground state by taking g to
be a suitable normalising constant C – we’ll consider more elaborate choices
below. Our present ground-state wavefunction is
⟨x|0⟩= C e−(x2+y2)/4r2
B.
(3.56)
In classical physics a particle that moves at speed v perpendicular to a
uniform magnetic ﬁeld moves in circles of radius r = mv/QB =
√
2mE/QB =
p
2E/mω2. When E = 1
2¯hω this radius agrees with the dispersion rB in
radius of the Gaussian probability distribution |⟨x|0⟩|2 that we have just
derived.
A wavefunction in the ﬁrst excited level is
⟨x|1⟩∝⟨x|a†|0⟩∝
 ∂
∂u −
v
4r2
B

e−uv/4r2
B ∝ve−uv/4r2
B.
(3.57)
It is easy to see that each further application of a† will introduce an additional
power of v, so that we have
⟨x|n⟩∝vne−uv/4r2
B = (x −iy)ne−(x2+y2)/4r2
B.
(3.58)
We shall see in §7.2.3 that the factor (x−iy)n implies that the particle has n
units of angular momentum about the origin.8 We can also show from this
formula that for large n the expectation of the orbital radius increases as
the square root of the energy, in agreement with classical mechanics (Prob-
lem 3.20).
Displacement of the gyrocentre
A particle in the state (3.58) gyrates
around the origin of the xy plane. Since the underlying physics (unlike the
Hamiltonian 3.31) is invariant under displacements within the xy plane, there
must be a ground-state ket in which the particle gyrates around any given
point. Hence, every energy level associated with motion in a uniform mag-
netic ﬁeld is highly degenerate: it has more than one linearly independent
eigenket.
It was our choice of magnetic vector potential A that made the origin
have a special status in H: the potential we used can be written A = 1
2B×x.
The choice Λ = −1
2x · (B × a), where a is any vector, makes the gauge
transformation from A to A′ = A −1
2B × a, so if A =
1
2B × x, then
A′ = 1
2B × (x −a). If we replace A in H with A′, it will prove expedient
to redeﬁne πx, πy such that the wavefunctions that are generated by the
procedure we used before will describe a particle that gyrates around x = a
instead of the origin. Thus in the gauge A′, the wavefunction of a ground-
state particle that gyrates around x = a is
⟨x|0′, a⟩= C e−(x−a)2/4r2
B.
(3.59)
We can use the theory of gauge transformations that we derived in §3.3.1 to
transform this back to our original gauge A. The result is
⟨x|0, a⟩= C eiQ(B×a)·x/2¯h e−(x−a)2/4r2
B.
(3.60)
8 This statement follows because in spherical polar coordinates (x −iy)n = rne−inφ.


50
Chapter 3: Harmonic oscillators and magnetic ﬁelds
This procedure is easily generalised to the determination of the wavefunction
of the nth Landau level for gyration about x = a.
A complete set of mutually orthogonal stationary states is needed if we
want to expand a general state of motion in a magnetic ﬁeld as a linear
combination of stationary states. Wavefunctions such as (3.56) and (3.60)
that diﬀer only in their gyrocentres are not orthogonal, so it is not convenient
to combine them in a set of basis states. To obtain a complete set of mutually
orthogonal states we can either return to equation (3.55) and set g(u) =
u, u2, . . ., etc., or we can step still further back to equations (3.47) and
note that we started with four operators, x, y, px and py, but expressed the
Hamiltonian Hxy in terms of just two operators πx and πy, which we then
packaged into the ladder operators a and a†.
Consider the operators
ξx ≡px −1
2mωy
√
mω¯h
;
ξy ≡py + 1
2mωx
√
mω¯h
.
(3.61)
They diﬀer from the operators πx and πy deﬁned by equations (3.47b) only
in a sign each, and they commute with them. For example
[ξx, πx] =
1
mω¯h[px −1
2mωy, px + 1
2mωy] = 0
[ξx, πy] =
1
mω¯h[px −1
2mωy, py −1
2mωx] = 0.
(3.62)
Consequently they commute with Hxy. On the other hand, [ξx, ξy] = −i, so
from these operators we can construct the ladder operators
b =
1
√2(ξx −iξy)
b† =
1
√2(ξx + iξy)
⇒
[b, b†] = i[ξx, ξy] = 1.
(3.63)
Since these ladder operators commute with Hxy, we can ﬁnd a complete set
of mutual eigenkets of b†b and Hxy.
In the position representation the new ladder operators are
b = −i rB
√2
 ∂
∂u +
v
4r2
B

;
b† = −i rB
√2
 ∂
∂v −
u
4r2
B

.
(3.64)
When we apply b to the ground-state wavefunction ⟨x|0⟩= Ce−uv/4r2
B
(eq. 3.56), we ﬁnd
b⟨x|0⟩= −iCrB
√2
 ∂
∂u +
v
4r2
B

e−uv/4r2
B = 0.
(3.65)
Thus Ce−uv/4r2
B is annihilated by both a and b. When we apply b† to this
wavefunction we obtain
b†⟨x|0⟩= −iCrB
√2
 ∂
∂v −
u
4r2
B

e−uv/4r2
B ∝u e−uv/4r2
B,
(3.66)
which is the wavefunction we would have obtained if we had set g(u) = u in
equation (3.55). In fact it’s clear from equation (3.66) that every application
of b† will introduce an additional factor u before the exponential. Therefore
the series of ground-state wavefunctions that are obtained by repeatedly
applying b† to e−uv/4r2
B are all of the form
(b†)n⟨x|0⟩∝une−uv/4r2
B.
(3.67)
The only diﬀerence between this general ground-state wavefunction9 and the
wavefunction of the nth excited Landau level (eq. 3.57) is that the former has
un rather than vn in front of the exponential. For the physical explanation
of this result, see Problem 3.24.
9 The absolute value of the real part of this is shown for n = 4 on the front cover.


3.3 Motion in a magnetic ﬁeld
51
Figure 3.4 The Aharonov–Bohm experiment
3.3.3 Aharonov-Bohm eﬀect
Imagine a very long, thin solenoid that runs parallel to the z axis. There is
a strong magnetic ﬁeld inside the solenoid, but because the solenoid is long,
the ﬁeld lines are extremely thinly spread as they return from the solenoid’s
north pole to its south pole, and outside the solenoid the magnetic ﬁeld is
negligibly small. In the limit that the solenoid becomes inﬁnitely thin, a
suitable vector potential for the ﬁeld is
A = Φ
2π

−y
r2 , x
r2 , 0

,
(3.68)
where r =
p
x2 + y2 and Φ is the magnetic ﬂux through the solenoid. To
justify this statement we note that when we integrate A around a circle
of radius r, the integral evaluates to Φ independent of r. But by Stokes’
theorem
I
dx · A =
Z
d2x · ∇× A =
Z
d2x · B.
(3.69)
Thus Φ units of ﬂux run along the axis r = 0, and there is no ﬂux anywhere
else.
Now we place a screen with two slits in the plane y = 0, with the slits
distance 2s apart and running parallel to the solenoid and on either side of
it. We bombard the screen from y < 0 with particles that have well deﬁned
momentum p = pj parallel to the y axis, and we detect the arrival of the
particles on a screen P that lies in the plane y = L – apart from the presence
of the solenoid, the arrangement is identical to that of the standard two-
slit experiment of §2.3.4. Classical physics predicts that the particles are
unaﬀected by B since they never enter the region of non-zero B. Aharonov
& Bohm pointed out10 that the prediction of quantum mechanics is diﬀerent.
Consider the function
Λ = −Φ
2πθ,
(3.70)
where θ is the usual polar angle in the xy plane. Since θ = arctan(y/x),
∂θ
∂x = −y
r2
and
∂θ
∂y = x
r2 ,
(3.71)
and the gradient of Λ is
∇Λ = −Φ
2πr2 (−y, x, 0)
(3.72)
which is minus the vector potential A of equation (3.68). So let’s make a
gauge transformation from A to A′ = A + ∇Λ. In this gauge, the vector
potential vanishes, so the Hamiltonian is just that of a free particle, p2/2m.
Hence the analysis of §2.3.4 applies, and the amplitude to pass through a
10 Y. Aharonov & D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 115, 485 (1959)


52
Problems
given slit and arrive at a point on the screen P with coordinate x has a phase
φ that is proportional to x (cf eq. 2.71):
φi = constant ± psx
¯hL ,
(3.73)
where the plus sign applies for one slit and the minus sign for the other.
Our choice of gauge leads to a tricky detail, however. We require Λ to be
single valued, so we must restrict the polar angle θ to a range 2π in extent.
Consequently, θ and Λ must be somewhere discontinuous. We get around
this problem by using diﬀerent forms of Λ, and therefore diﬀerent gauges, to
derive the amplitudes for arrival at x from each slit. For slit S1 at x = +s,
we take −π < θ ≤π, and for S2 at x = −s we take −2π < θ ≤0. With these
choices the discontinuity in Λ occurs where the electron does not go, and Λ is
always the same in the region y < 0 occupied by the incoming electron beam.
Consequently, the amplitudes for arrival at a point x on the screen P are the
same as if the solenoid were not there.
However, before we can add the
amplitudes and calculate the interference pattern, we have to transform to a
common gauge. The easiest way to do this is to transform the amplitude for
S2 to the gauge of S1. The function that eﬀects the transformation between
the gauges is ∆≡Λ1−Λ2, where Λi is the gauge function used for slit Si. At
any point of P the two forms of θ diﬀer by 2π, so ∆= −Φ. Therefore equation
(3.40) requires us to multiplying the amplitude for S2 by exp(−iQΦ/¯h), and
the quantum interference term (1.15) becomes
constant × ei(φ1−φ2+QΦ/¯h) ∝exp
 i
¯h
2psx
L
+ QΦ

.
(3.74)
The term QΦ in the exponential shifts the centre of the interference pattern
by an amount ∆x = −LQΦ/2ps, so by switching the current in the solenoid
on and oﬀyou can change the interference pattern that is generated by par-
ticles that never enter the region to which B is conﬁned. This prediction was
ﬁrst conﬁrmed experimentally by R.G. Chambers.11 Although this eﬀect has
no counterpart in classical mechanics, curiously the shift ∆x is independent
of h and does not vanish in the limit h →0, which is often regarded as the
classical limit.
Problems
3.1
After choosing units in which everything, including ¯h = 1, the Hamilto-
nian of a harmonic oscillator may be written H = 1
2(p2+x2), where [x, p] = i.
Show that if |ψ⟩is a ket that satisﬁes H|ψ⟩= E|ψ⟩, then
1
2(p2 + x2)(x ∓ip)|ψ⟩= (E ± 1)(x ∓ip)|ψ⟩.
(3.75)
Explain how this algebra enables one to determine the energy eigenvalues of
a harmonic oscillator.
3.2
Given that A|En⟩= α|En−1⟩and En = (n + 1
2)¯hω, where the annihi-
lation operator of the harmonic oscillator is
A ≡mωx + ip
√
2m¯hω
,
(3.76)
show that α = √n. Hint: consider |A|En⟩|2.
3.3
The pendulum of a grandfather clock has a period of 1 s and makes
excursions of 3 cm either side of dead centre. Given that the bob weighs
0.2 kg, around what value of n would you expect its non-negligible quantum
amplitudes to cluster?
11 Phys. Rev. Lett. 5, 3 (1960)


Problems
53
Figure 3.5 The wavefunctions ⟨x|2⟩
and ⟨x|40⟩of two stationary states of
a harmonic oscillator.
3.4
Show that the minimum value of E(p, x) ≡p2/2m + 1
2mω2x2 with
respect to the real numbers p, x when they are constrained to satisfy xp = 1
2¯h,
is 1
2¯hω. Explain the physical signiﬁcance of this result.
3.5
How many nodes are there in the wavefunction ⟨x|n⟩of the nth excited
state of a harmonic oscillator?
3.6
Show that in terms of a harmonic oscillator’s characteristic length ℓ≡
p
¯h/2mω the ladder operators can be written
A = x
2ℓ+ ℓ∂
∂x
and
A† = x
2ℓ−ℓ∂
∂x.
(3.77)
Hence show that the wavefunction of the second excited state is ⟨x|2⟩=
constant × (x2/ℓ2 −1)e−x2/4ℓ2 and ﬁnd the normalising constant.
3.7
Explain why the wavefunction ⟨x|n⟩of the oscillator’s nth stationary
state must have the form
⟨x|n⟩= Hn(x/ℓ) e−x2/4ℓ2,
(3.78)
where Hn is an nth-order (‘Hermite’) polynomial. By casting the equations
A|n⟩= √n|n −1⟩and A†|n −1⟩= √n|n⟩in the x-representation, show that
H′
n(x/ℓ) = √nHn−1(x/ℓ)
and
√nHn(x/ℓ) = x
ℓHn−1(x/ℓ) −H′
n−1(x/ℓ).
(3.79)
and thus that
√nHn(x/ℓ) = x
ℓHn−1(x/ℓ) −
√
n −1Hn−2(x/ℓ).
(3.80)
Given that H0 = (2πℓ2)−1/4 and H1(y) = y/(2πℓ2)1/4, use this recurrence
relation to reproduce the plots of the wavefunctions ⟨x|2⟩and ⟨x|40⟩shown
in Figure 3.5. Explain the physical signiﬁcance of the vertical arrows. Why
is the amplitude of ⟨x|40⟩largest near the right arrow?
3.8
Use
x =
r
¯h
2mω(A + A†) = ℓ(A + A†)
(3.81)
to show for a harmonic oscillator that in the energy representation the op-
erator x is
xjk = ℓ















0
√1
0
0
. . .
√1
0
√2
0
0
√2
0
√3
· · ·
√3
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
0
√n −1
. . .
√n −1
0
√n
√n
0
√n + 1
· · ·
√n + 1
0
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·















(3.82)
Calculate the same entries for the matrix pjk.


54
Problems
3.9
Show that the momentum operator of a harmonic oscillator can be
expressed in terms of the creation and annihilation operators as
p = i¯h
2ℓ(A† −A)
where
ℓ≡
r
¯h
2mω.
(3.83)
Hence show that
⟨0|p2|0⟩=
 ¯h
2ℓ
2
.
(3.84)
How does this result relate to the physics of a free particle discussed in §2.3.3?
3.10
At t = 0 the state of a harmonic oscillator, mass m frequency ω, is
|ψ⟩=
1
√2|N −1⟩+ 1
√2|N⟩.
(3.85)
Show that subsequently
⟨x⟩t =
√
Nℓcos(ωt)
where
ℓ≡
r
¯h
2mω.
(3.86)
Interpret this result physically. What does this example teach us about the
validity of classical mechanics?
Show that a classical oscillator with energy (N + 1
2)¯hω has amplitude
xmax = 2
q
N + 1
2 ℓ.
(3.87)
To explain the discrepancy between these results, consider the case in
which initially
|ψ⟩=
1
√K
N+K−1
X
k=N
|k⟩
(3.88)
with N ≫K ≫1. Show that then ⟨x⟩t ≃2√Nℓcos(ωt) consistent with
classical physics.
3.11∗
By expressing the annihilation operator A of the harmonic oscillator
in the momentum representation, obtain ⟨p|0⟩. Check that your expression
agrees with that obtained from the Fourier transform of
⟨x|0⟩=
1
(2πℓ2)1/4 e−x2/4ℓ2,
where
ℓ≡
r
¯h
2mω.
(3.89)
3.12
Show that for any two N ×N matrices A, B, trace([A, B]) = 0. Com-
ment on this result in the light of the results of Problem 3.8 and the canonical
commutation relation [x, p] = i¯h.
3.13∗
A Fermi oscillator has Hamiltonian H = f †f, where f is an oper-
ator that satisﬁes
f 2 = 0
;
ff † + f †f = 1.
(3.90)
Show that H2 = H, and thus ﬁnd the eigenvalues of H.
If the ket |0⟩
satisﬁes H|0⟩= 0 with ⟨0|0⟩= 1, what are the kets (a) |a⟩≡f|0⟩, and (b)
|b⟩≡f †|0⟩?
In quantum ﬁeld theory the vacuum is pictured as an assembly of os-
cillators, one for each possible value of the momentum of each particle type.
A boson is an excitation of a harmonic oscillator, while a fermion in an ex-
citation of a Fermi oscillator. Explain the connection between the spectrum
of f †f and the Pauli principle.


Problems
55
3.14
In the time interval (t + δt, t) the Hamiltonian H of some system
varies in such a way that |H|ψ⟩| remains ﬁnite.
Show that under these
circumstances |ψ⟩is a continuous function of time.
A harmonic oscillator with frequency ω is in its ground state when the
stiﬀness of the spring is instantaneously reduced by a factor f 4 < 1, so its
natural frequency becomes f 2ω. What is the probability that the oscillator
is subsequently found to have energy 3
2¯hf 2ω? Discuss the classical analogue
of this problem.
3.15∗
P is the probability that at the end of the experiment described in
Problem 3.14, the oscillator is in its second excited state. Show that when
f = 1
2, P = 0.144 as follows. First show that the annihilation operator of
the original oscillator
A = 1
2

(f −1 + f)A′ + (f −1 −f)A′†	
,
(3.91)
where A′ and A′† are the annihilation and creation operators of the ﬁnal
oscillator. Then writing the ground-state ket of the original oscillator as a
sum |0⟩= P
n cn|n′⟩over the energy eigenkets of the ﬁnal oscillator, impose
the condition A|0⟩= 0. Finally use the normalisation of |0⟩and the orthogo-
nality of the |n′⟩. What value do you get for the probability of the oscillator
remaining in the ground state?
Show that at the end of the experiment the expectation value of the
energy is 0.2656¯hω.
Explain physically why this is less than the original
ground-state energy 1
2¯hω.
This example contains the physics behind the inﬂationary origin of the
Universe: gravity explosively enlarges the vacuum, which is an inﬁnite collec-
tion of harmonic oscillators (Problem 3.13). Excitations of these oscillators
correspond to elementary particles. Before inﬂation the vacuum is unexcited
so every oscillator is in its ground state. At the end of inﬂation, there is non-
negligible probability of many oscillators being excited and each excitation
implies the existence of a newly created particle.
3.16∗
In terms of the usual ladder operators A, A†, a Hamiltonian can be
written
H = µA†A + λ(A + A†).
(3.92)
What restrictions on the values of the numbers µ and λ follow from the
requirement for H to be Hermitian?
Show that for a suitably chosen operator B, H can be rewritten
H = µB†B + constant.
(3.93)
where [B, B†] = 1. Hence determine the spectrum of H.
3.17∗
Numerically calculate the spectrum of the anharmonic oscillator shown
in Figure 3.2. From it estimate the period at a sequence of energies. Compare
your quantum results with the equivalent classical results.
3.18∗
Let B = cA+sA†, where c ≡cosh θ, s ≡sinh θ with θ a real constant
and A, A† are the usual ladder operators. Show that [B, B†] = 1.
Consider the Hamiltonian
H = ǫA†A + 1
2λ(A†A† + AA),
(3.94)
where ǫ and λ are real and such that ǫ > λ > 0. Show that when
ǫc −λs = Ec
;
λc −ǫs = Es
(3.95)
with E a constant, [B, H] = EB. Hence determine the spectrum of H in
terms of ǫ and λ.


56
Problems
3.19
This problem is all classical electromagnetism, but it gives physical
insight into quantum physics. It is hard to do without a command of Carte-
sian tensor notation (Appendix B). A point charge Q is placed at the origin
in the magnetic ﬁeld generated by a spatially conﬁned current distribution.
Given that
E =
Q
4πǫ0
r
r3
(3.96)
and B = ∇× A with ∇· A = 0, show that the ﬁeld’s momentum
P ≡ǫ0
Z
d3x E × B = QA(0).
(3.97)
Write down the relation between the particle’s position and momentum and
interpret this relation physically in light of the result you have just obtained.
Hint: write E = −(Q/4πǫ0)∇r−1 and B = ∇× A, expand the vector
triple product and integrate each of the resulting terms by parts so as to
exploit in one ∇· A = 0 and in the other ∇2r−1 = −4πδ3(r). The tensor
form of Gauss’s theorem states that
R
d3x ∇iT =
H
d2Si T no matter how
many indices the tensor T may carry.
3.20
From equation (3.58) show that the the normalised wavefunction of
a particle of mass m that is in the nth Landau level of a uniform magnetic
ﬁeld B is
⟨x|n⟩=
rne−r2/4r2
Be−inφ
2(n+1)/2√
n! π rn+1
B
,
(3.98)
where rB =
p
¯h/QB.
Hence show that the expectation of the particle’s
gyration radius is
⟨r⟩n ≡⟨n|r|n⟩=
√
2(n + 1
2)!
n!
rB.
(3.99)
Show further that
δ ln ⟨r⟩n
δn
≃1
2n
(3.100)
and thus show that in the limit of large n, ⟨r⟩∝√E, where E is the energy
of the level. Show that this result is in accordance with the correspondence
principle.
3.21
Show that in the gauge in which the magnetic vector potential is
A = 1
2B × x the wavefunction of the nth Landau level of gyration about the
point a is
⟨x|n, a⟩= eiQ(B×a)·x/2¯h{(x −ax) −i(y −ay)}ne−|x−a|2/4r2
B.
(3.101)
3.22
A particle of charge Q is conﬁned to move in the xy plane, with
electrostatic potential φ = 0 and vector potential A satisfying
∇× A = (0, 0, B).
(3.102)
Consider the operators ρx, ρy, Rx and Ry, deﬁned by
ρ =
1
QB ˆez × (p −QA)
and
R = r −ρ,
(3.103)
where r and p are the usual position and momentum operators, and ˆez is
the unit vector along B. Show that the only non-zero commutators formed
from the x- and y-components of these are
[ρx, ρy] = ir2
B
and
[Rx, Ry] = −ir2
B,
(3.104)


Problems
57
where r2
B = ¯h/QB.
The operators a, a†, b and b† are deﬁned via
a =
1
√
2 rB
(ρx + iρy)
and
b =
1
√
2 rB
(Ry + iRx).
(3.105)
Evaluate [a, a†] and [b, b†]. Show that for suitably deﬁned ω, the Hamiltonian
can be written
H = ¯hω
 a†a + 1
2

.
(3.106)
Given that there exists a unique state |ψ⟩satisfying
a|ψ⟩= b|ψ⟩= 0,
(3.107)
what conclusions can be drawn about the allowed energies of the Hamiltonian
and their degeneracies? What is the physical interpretation of these results?
3.23
Using cylindrical polar coordinates (R, φ, z), show that the probability
current density associated with the wavefunction (3.98) of the nth Landau
level is
J(R) = −¯hR2n−1e−R2/2r2
B
2n+1πn!mr2n+2
B

n + R2
2r2
B

ˆeφ,
(3.108)
where rB ≡
p
¯h/QB. Plot J as a function of R and interpret your plot
physically.
3.24
Determine the probability current density associated with the nth
Landau ground-state wavefunction (3.67) (which for n = 4 is shown in Fig-
ure Landauﬁg). Use your result to explain in as much detail as you can why
this state can be interpreted as a superposition of states in which the electron
gyrates around diﬀerent gyrocentres. Hint: adapt equation (3.108).
Why is the energy of a gyrating electron incremented if we multiply the
wavefunction e−(mω/4¯h)r2 by vn = (x −iy)n but not if we multiply it by
un = (x + iy)n?


4
Transformations & Observables
In §2.1 we associated an operator with every observable quantity through
a sum over all states in which the system has a well-deﬁned value of the
observable (eq. 2.5). We found that this operator enabled us to calculate
the expectation value of any function of the observable. Moreover, from the
operator we could recover the observable’s allowed values and the associ-
ated states because they are the operator’s eigenvalues and eigenkets. These
properties make an observable’s operator a useful repository of information
about the observable, a handy ﬁling system. But they do not give the opera-
tor much physical meaning. Above all, they don’t answer the question ‘what
does an operator actually do when it operates?’ In this chapter we answer
this question. In the process of doing this, we will see why the canonical
commutation relations (2.54) have the form that they do, and introduce the
angular-momentum operators, which will play important roles in the rest of
the book.
4.1 Transforming kets
When one meets an unfamiliar object, one may study it by moving it around,
perhaps turning it over in one’s hands so as to learn about its shape. In §1.3
we claimed that all physical information about any system is encapsulated
in its ket |ψ⟩, so we must learn how |ψ⟩changes as we move and turn the
system.
Even the simplest systems can have orientations in addition to posi-
tions. For example, an electron, a lithium nucleus or a water molecule all
have orientations because they are not spherically symmetric: an electron
is a magnetic dipole, a 7Li nucleus has an electric quadrupole, and a water
molecule is a V-shaped thing. The ket |ψ⟩that describes any of these objects
contains information about the object’s orientation in addition to its position
and momentum. In the next subsection we shall focus on the location of a
quantum system, but later we shall be concerned with its orientation as well,
and in preparation for that work we explicitly display a label µ of the sys-
tem’s orientation and any other relevant properties, such as internal energy.
For the moment µ is just an abstract symbol for orientation information; the
details will be ﬂeshed out in §7.1.


4.1 Transforming kets
59
Figure 4.1 A spherical wavefunction
and its displaced version.
4.1.1 Translating kets
We now focus on the location of our system. To keep track of this we use a
coordinate system Σ0 whose origin is some well-deﬁned point, say the centre
of our laboratory.
We can investigate |ψ⟩by expanding it in terms of a
complete set of eigenstates |x, µ⟩, where x is the position vector of the centre
of mass and µ represents the system’s orientation. The amplitude for ﬁnding
the system’s centre of mass at x with the orientation speciﬁed by µ is
ψµ(x) ≡⟨x, µ|ψ⟩.
(4.1)
If we know all the derivatives of the wavefunction ψµ at a position x, Taylor’s
theorem gives the value of the wavefunction at some other location x −a as
ψµ(x −a) =
"
1 −a · ∂
∂x + 1
2!

a · ∂
∂x
2
−. . .
#
ψµ(x)
= exp

−a · ∂
∂x

ψµ(x)
= ⟨x, µ| exp

−ia · p
¯h

|ψ⟩.
(4.2)
This equation tells us that in the state |ψ⟩, the amplitude to ﬁnd the system
at x −a with orientation etc µ is the same as the amplitude to ﬁnd the
system with unchanged orientation at x when it is a diﬀerent state, namely
|ψ′⟩≡U(a)|ψ⟩
where
U(a) ≡exp(−ia · p/¯h).
(4.3)
In this notation, equation (4.2) becomes
ψµ(x −a) = ⟨x, µ|U(a)|ψ⟩= ⟨x, µ|ψ′⟩= ψ′
µ(x),
(4.4)
so, as Figure 4.1 illustrates, the wavefunction ψ′
µ for |ψ′⟩is the wavefunction
we would expect for a system that is identical with the one described by
|ψ⟩except for being shifted along the vector a. We shall refer to this new
system as the translated or transformed system and we shall say that the
translation operator operator U(a) translates |ψ⟩through a even though
|ψ⟩is not an object in real space, so this is a slight abuse of language.
The ket |ψ′⟩of the translated system is a function of the vector a. It
is instructive to take its partial derivative with respect to one component of
a, say ax. Evaluating the resulting derivative at a = 0, when |ψ′⟩= |ψ⟩, we
ﬁnd
i¯h∂|ψ⟩
∂ax
= −i¯h∂|ψ⟩
∂x = px|ψ⟩.
(4.5)
Thus the operator px gives the rate at which the system’s ket changes as
we translate the system along the x axis. So we have answered the question


60
Chapter 4: Transformations & Observables
Box 4.1:
Passive transformations
We can describe objects such as atoms equally well using any coordinate
system. Imagine a whole family of coordinate systems set up throughout
space, such that every physical point is at the origin of one coordinate
system. We label by Σy the coordinate system whose origin coincides
with the point labelled by y in our original coordinate system Σ0, and we
indicate the coordinate system used to obtain a wavefunction by making
y a second argument of the wavefunction; ψµ(x; y) is the amplitude to
ﬁnd the system at the point labelled x in Σy.
Because the diﬀerent
coordinate systems vary smoothly with y, we can use Taylor’s theorem
to express amplitudes in, say, Σa+y in terms of amplitudes in Σy. We
have
ψµ(x; a + y) = exp

a · ∂
∂y

ψµ(x; y).
(1)
Now ψµ(x; a) = ψµ(x+a; 0) because both expressions give the amplitude
for the system to be at the same physical location, the point called x in
Σa and called x + a in Σ0. Then equations (4.4) and (1) give
⟨x, µ; 0|U(−a)|ψ⟩= ψµ(x + a; 0) = ψµ(x; a),
(2)
where again |x, µ; 0⟩indicates the state in which the system is located
at the point labelled by x in Σ0. This equation tells us that |ψ⟩has
the same wavefunction in Σa that | ¯ψ⟩≡U(−a)|ψ⟩has in Σ0. There-
fore, moving the origin of our coordinates through a vector a has the
same eﬀect on an arbitrary state’s wavefunction as moving the system
itself through −a. Physically moving the system is known as an active
transformation, whereas leaving the state alone but changing the co-
ordinate system is called a passive transformation. The inﬁnitesimal
vectors required to make logically equivalent active and passive transfor-
mations diﬀer in sign. This sign diﬀerence reﬂects the fact that if you
move backwards, the world around you seems to move forwards; hence
moving the origin of one’s coordinates back by δa has the same eﬀect as
moving the system forward by δa. In this book we conﬁne ourselves to
active transformations.
posed above as to what an observable’s operator actually does in the case of
the momentum operators.
Equation (2.78) enables us to expand a state of well-deﬁned position x0
in terms of momentum eigenstates. We have
|x0, µ⟩=
Z
d3p |p, µ⟩⟨p, µ|x0, µ⟩=
1
h3/2
Z
d3p e−ix0·p/¯h|p, µ⟩.
(4.6)
Applying the translation operator, we obtain with (4.3)
U(a)|x0, µ⟩=
1
h3/2
Z
d3p e−ix0·p/¯h U(a)|p, µ⟩
=
1
h3/2
Z
d3p e−i(x0+a)·p/¯h |p, µ⟩
= |x0 + a, µ⟩,
(4.7)
which is a new state, in which the system is deﬁnitely located at x0 + a, as
we would expect.
4.1.2 Continuous transformations and generators
In §1.3 we saw that the normalisation condition ⟨ψ|ψ⟩= 1 expresses the
fact that when we make a measurement of any observable, we will measure


4.1 Transforming kets
61
Box 4.2: Operators from expectation values
In this box we show that if
⟨ψ|A|ψ⟩= ⟨ψ|B|ψ⟩,
(1)
for every state |ψ⟩, then the operators A and B are identical. We set
|ψ⟩= |φ⟩+λ|χ⟩, where λ is a complex number. Then equation (1) implies
λ (⟨φ|A|χ⟩−⟨φ|B|χ⟩) = λ∗(⟨χ|B|φ⟩−⟨χ|A|φ⟩) .
(2)
Since equation (1) is valid for any state |ψ⟩, equation (2) remains valid as
we vary λ. If the coeﬃcients of λ and λ∗are non-zero, we can cause the
left and right sides of (2) to change diﬀerently by varying the phase of
λ; they can be equal irrespective of the phase of λ only if the coeﬃcients
vanish. This shows that ⟨χ|A|φ⟩= ⟨χ|B|φ⟩for for arbitrary states |φ⟩
and |χ⟩, from which it follows that A = B.
some value; for example, if we determine the system’s location, we will ﬁnd
it somewhere. The normalisation condition must be unaﬀected by any trans-
formation that we make on a system, so the transformation operator1 U
must have the property that for any state |ψ⟩
1 = ⟨ψ′|ψ′⟩= ⟨ψ|U †U|ψ⟩.
(4.8)
From this requirement we can infer by the argument given in Box 4.2 (with
A = U †U and B = I, the identity operator) that U †U = I, so U † = U −1.
Operators with this property are called unitary operators. When we trans-
form all states with a unitary operator, we leave unchanged all amplitudes:
⟨φ′|ψ′⟩= ⟨φ|ψ⟩for any states |φ⟩and |ψ⟩.
Exactly how we construct a unitary operator depends on the type of
transformation we wish it to make.
The identity operator is the unitary
operator that represents doing nothing to our system. The translation oper-
ator U(a) can be made to approach the identity as closely as we please by
diminishing the magnitude of a. Many other unitary operators also have a
parameter θ that can be reduced to zero such that the operator tends to the
identity. In this case we can write for small δθ
U(δθ) = I −iδθ τ + O(δθ)2,
(4.9)
where the factor of i is a matter of convention and τ is an operator. The
unitarity of U implies that
I = U †(δθ)U(δθ) = I + iδθ (τ † −τ) + O(δθ2).
(4.10)
Equating powers of δθ on the two sides of the equation, we deduce that τ
is Hermitian, so it may be an observable. If so, its eigenkets are states in
which the system has well-deﬁned values of the observable τ.
We obtain an important equation by using equation (4.9) to evaluate
|ψ′⟩≡U(δθ)|ψ⟩. Subtracting |ψ⟩from both sides of the resulting equation,
dividing through by δθ and proceeding to the limit δθ →0, we obtain
i∂|ψ′⟩
∂θ
= τ|ψ′⟩.
(4.11)
Thus the observable τ gives the rate at which |ψ⟩changes when we increase
the parameter θ in the unitary transformation that τ generates. Equation
(4.5) is a concrete example of this equation in action.
1 We restrict ourselves to the case in which the operator U is linear, as is every operator
used in this book. In consequence, we are unable to consider time reversal.


62
Chapter 4: Transformations & Observables
A ﬁnite transformation can be generated by repeatedly performing an
inﬁnitesimal one.
Speciﬁcally, if we transform N times with U(δθ) with
δθ = θ/N, then in the limit N →∞we have
U(θ) ≡lim
N→∞

1 −i θ
N τ
N
= e−iθτ.
(4.12)
This relation is clearly a generalisation of the deﬁnition (4.3) of the trans-
lation operator. The Hermitian operator τ is called the generator of both
the unitary operator U and the transformations that U accomplishes; for
example, p/¯h is the generator of translations.
4.1.3 The rotation operator
Consider what happens if we rotate the system. Whereas in §4.1.1 we con-
structed a state |ψ′⟩= U(a)|ψ⟩that diﬀered from the state |ψ⟩only in a
shift by a in the location of the centre of mass, we now wish to ﬁnd a ro-
tation operator that constructs the state |ψ′⟩that we would get if we could
somehow rotate the apparatus on a turntable without disturbing its internal
structure in any way. Whereas the orientation of the system is unaﬀected
by a translation, it will be changed by the rotation operator, as is physically
evident if we imagine turning a non-spherical object on a turntable.
From §4.1.2 we know that a rotation operator will be unitary, and have a
Hermitian generator. Actually, we expect there to be several generators, just
as there are three generators, px/¯h, py/¯h and pz/¯h, of translations. Because
there are three generators of translations, three numbers, the components of
the vector a in equation (4.3), are required to specify a particular translation.
Hence we anticipate that the number of generators of rotations will equal
the number of angles that are required to specify a rotation. Two angles are
required to specify the axis of rotation, and a third is required to specify
the angle through which we rotate. Thus by analogy with equation (4.3), we
expect that a general rotation operator can be obtained by exponentiating
a linear combination of three generators of rotations, and we write
U(α) = exp(−iα · J).
(4.13)
Here α is a vector that speciﬁes a rotation through an angle |α| around
the direction of the unit vector ˆα, and J is comprised of three Hermitian
operators, Jx, Jy and Jz. In the course of this chapter and the next it will
become clear that the observable associated with J is angular momentum.
Consequently, the components of J are called the angular-momentum op-
erators.
The role that the angular momentum operators play in rotating the
system around the axis ˆα is expressed by rewriting equation (4.11) with
appropriate substitutions as
i∂|ψ⟩
∂α = ˆα · J|ψ⟩.
(4.14)
4.1.4 Discrete transformations
(a) The parity operator
Not all transformations are continuous. In
physics, the most prominent example of a discrete transformation is the
parity transformation P, which swaps the sign of the coordinates of all
spatial points; the action of P on coordinates is represented by the matrix
P ≡


−1
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0
−1


so
Px = −x.
(4.15)


4.1 Transforming kets
63
Notice that det P = −1, whereas a rotation matrix has det R = +1. In fact,
any linear transformation with determinant equal to −1 can be written as a
product of P and a rotation R.
Let an arbitrary quantum state |ψ⟩have wavefunction ψµ(x) = ⟨x, µ|ψ⟩,
where the label µ is the usual shorthand for the system’s orientation. Then
the quantum parity operator P is deﬁned by
ψ′
µ(x) ≡⟨x, µ|P|ψ⟩≡ψµ(Px) = ψµ(−x) = ⟨−x, µ|ψ⟩.
(4.16)
The wavefunction of the new state, |ψ′⟩= P|ψ⟩, takes the same value at x
that the old wavefunction does at −x. Thus, when the system is in the state
P|ψ⟩, it has the same amplitude to be at x as it had to be at −x when it was
in the state |ψ⟩. The orientation and internal properties of the system are
unaﬀected by P. The invariance of orientation under a parity transformation
is not self evident, but in §4.2 we shall see that it follows from the rules that
govern commutation of P with x and J.
Applying the parity operator twice creates a state |ψ′′⟩= P|ψ′⟩= P 2|ψ⟩
with wavefunction
ψ′′
µ(x) = ⟨x, µ|P|ψ′⟩= ⟨−x, µ|ψ′⟩= ⟨−x, µ|P|ψ⟩= ⟨x, µ|ψ⟩
= ψµ(x).
(4.17)
Hence P 2 = 1 and an even number of applications of the parity operator
leaves the wavefunction unchanged. It also follows that P = P −1 is its own
inverse.
P is also Hermitian:
⟨φ|P|ψ⟩∗=
Z
d3x
X
µ
(⟨φ|x, µ⟩⟨x, µ|P|ψ⟩)∗
=
Z
d3x
X
µ
(⟨φ|x, µ⟩⟨−x, µ|ψ⟩)∗
=
Z
d3x
X
µ
⟨ψ| −x, µ⟩⟨x, µ|P 2|φ⟩
=
Z
d3x
X
µ
⟨ψ| −x, µ⟩⟨−x, µ|P|φ⟩= ⟨ψ|P|φ⟩,
(4.18)
so P † = P. It now follows that P is unitary2 because P −1 = P = P †. Hence
from the discussion of §4.1.2 it follows that transforming all states with P
will preserve all amplitudes for the system.
Suppose now that |P⟩is an eigenket of P, with eigenvalue λ.
Then
|P⟩= P 2|P⟩= λP|P⟩= λ2|P⟩, so λ2 = 1. Thus the eigenvalues of P are
±1. Eigenstates of P are said to have deﬁnite parity, with |+⟩= P|+⟩
being a state of even parity and |−⟩= −P|−⟩being one of odd parity.
In §3.1 we found that the stationary-state wavefunctions of a harmonic
oscillator are even functions of x when the quantum number n is even, and
odd functions of x otherwise. It is clear that these stationary states are also
eigenstates of P, those for n = 0, 2, 4, . . . having even parity and those for
n = 1, 3, 5, . . . having odd parity.
Mirror operators
Systems not infrequently exhibit a mirror symmetry of
some sort. When they do, it can be helpful to deﬁne an operator which trans-
forms any state into the corresponding mirror state. Here’s an illustrative
concrete example.
A particle moves in two dimensions, so the amplitudes ⟨x, y|ψ⟩for the
particle to be found at the location (x, y) constitute a complete set of am-
plitudes. Let the operator M be such that for any state |ψ⟩
⟨x, y|M|ψ⟩= ⟨y, x|ψ⟩.
(4.19)
2 Problem 4.9 shows that P is unitary by showing that it has an inﬁnitesimal generator.


64
Chapter 4: Transformations & Observables
Figure 4.2 If the coordinates of the
point marked with an ﬁlled circle are
(x, y), then the coordinates of the
point marked with an open circle are
(y, x). The points would be object
and image if a mirror lay along the
line y = x.
That is, in the state M|ψ⟩the amplitude to be at the point (x, y) (marked
with a ﬁlled dot in Figure 4.2) is the same as the amplitude to be at the
point (y, x) (marked by an open dot) when in the state |ψ⟩. If there were a
mirror along the line y = x, the image of a light at (x, y) would be located
at (y, x). Thus the operator M produces the state we get by mirroring al
the amplitudes in the line y = x. We leave as an exercise (Problem 4.12) the
proof that M is a unitary operator, which closely follows the proof we gave
of the unitarity of P.
If we mirror a set of amplitudes twice, we obviously recover the original
amplitudes, so M 2 = 1 and it follows that the eigenvalues of M can only be
±1.
4.2 Transformations of operators
When we move an object around, we expect to ﬁnd it in a new place. Specif-
ically, suppose ⟨ψ|x|ψ⟩= x0 for some state |ψ⟩. Since x0 just labels a spatial
point, it must behave under translations and rotations like any vector. For
example, translating a system that is in the state |ψ⟩through a, we obtain
a new state |ψ′⟩which has ⟨ψ′|x|ψ′⟩= x0 + a = ⟨ψ|x + Ia|ψ⟩. On the other
hand, from §4.1.1 we know that ⟨ψ′|x|ψ′⟩= ⟨ψ|U †(a)xU(a)|ψ⟩. Since these
expectation values must be equal for any initial state |ψ⟩, it follows from the
argument given in Box 4.2 that
U †(a) x U(a) = x + a,
(4.20)
where the identity operator is understood to multiply the constant a. For
an inﬁnitesimal translation with a →δa we have U(a) ≃1 −ia · p/¯h. So
x + δa ≃

1 + iδa · p
¯h

x

1 −iδa · p
¯h

= x −i
¯h [x, δa · p] + O(δa)2.
(4.21)
For this to be true for all small vectors δa, x and p must satisfy the commu-
tation relations
[xi, pj] = i¯hδij
(4.22)
in accordance with equation (2.54). Here we see that this commutation rela-
tion arises as a natural consequence of the properties of x under translations.
For a ﬁnite translation, we can write
U †(a) x U(a) = U †(a)U(a)x + U †(a)[x, U(a)] = x + U †(a) [x, U(a)] . (4.23)
We use equation (2.25) to evaluate the commutator on the right. Treating
U as the function e−ia·p/¯h of a · p, we ﬁnd
U †(a) x U(a) = x −i
¯hU †(a)[x, a · p]U(a) = x + a
(4.24)


4.2 Transformations of operators
65
Box 4.3:
Rotations in ordinary space
A rotation matrix R is deﬁned by the conditions RT = R−1 and
det(R) = +1. If R(α) rotates around the ˆα axis, it should leave this
axis invariant so R(α)ˆα = ˆα. For a rotation through an angle |α|,
Tr R(α) = 1 + 2 cos|α|.
Let α be an inﬁnitesi-
mal rotation vector: that is,
a rotation through α around
the axis that is in the direc-
tion of the unit vector ˆα.
We consider the eﬀect of ro-
tating an arbitrary vector v
through angle α. The com-
ponent of v parallel to α is
unchanged by the rotation.
The ﬁgure shows the projection of v into the plane perpendicular to
α. The rotated vector is seen to be the vectorial sum of v and the in-
ﬁnitesimal vector α × v that joins the end of v before and after rota-
tion. That is
v′ = v + α × v.
as equation (4.20) requires.
Similarly, under rotations ordinary spatial vectors have components
which transform as v →R(α)v, where R(α) is a matrix describing a rotation
through angle |α| around the ˆα axis. The expectation values ⟨ψ|x|ψ⟩= x0
should then transform in this way. In §4.1.2 we saw that when a system is
rotated through an angle |α| around the ˆα axis, its ket |ψ⟩should be mul-
tiplied by U(α) = e−iα·J. If this transformation of |ψ⟩is to be consistent
with the rotation of the expectation value of x, we need
R(α)⟨ψ|x|ψ⟩= ⟨ψ′|x|ψ′⟩= ⟨ψ|U †(α) x U(α)|ψ⟩.
(4.25)
Since this must hold for any state |ψ⟩, from the argument given in Box 4.2
it follows that
R(α)x = U †(α) x U(α).
(4.26)
For an inﬁnitesimal rotation, α →δα and R(α)x ≃x + δα × x as is
shown in Box 4.3, so equation (4.26) becomes
x + δα × x ≃(1 + iδα · J) x (1 −iδα · J)
= x + i [δα · J, x] + O(δα)2.
(4.27)
In components, the vector product δα × x can be written
(δα × x)i =
X
jk
ǫijkδαj xk,
(4.28)
where ǫijk is the object that changes sign if any two subscripts are inter-
changed and has ǫxyz = 1 (Appendix B). For example, equation (4.28) gives
(δα × x)x = P
jk ǫxjkδαj xk = ǫxyzδαy xz + ǫxzyδαz xy = δαyz −δαzy. The
ith components of equation (4.27) is
X
jk
ǫijkδαj xk = i
X
j
δαj[Jj, xi].
(4.29)
Since this equation holds for arbitrary δα, we conclude that the position
and angular momentum operators xi and Jj must satisfy the commutation
relation
[Ji, xj] = i
X
k
ǫijkxk.
(4.30)
In particular, [Jx, y] = iz and [Jz, x] = iy, while [Jx, x] = 0.


66
Chapter 4: Transformations & Observables
In fact, if the expectation value of any operator v is a spatial vector,
then the argument just given in the case of x shows that the components vi
must satisfy
[Ji, vj] = i
X
k
ǫijkvk.
(4.31)
For example, since momentum is a vector, equation (4.31) with v = p gives
the commutation relations of p with J,
[Ji, pj] = i
X
k
ǫijkpk.
(4.32)
The product α·J must be invariant under coordinate rotations because
the operator U(α) = e−iα·J depends on the direction ˆα and not on the
numbers used to quantify that direction. Since α is an arbitrary vector, the
invariance of α · J under rotations implies that under rotations the compo-
nents of J transform like those of a vector. Hence, in equation (4.31) we can
replace v by J to obtain the commutation relation
[Ji, Jj] = i
X
k
ǫijkJk.
(4.33)
In §7.1 shall deduce the spectrum of the angular-momentum operators from
this relation.
We now show that J commutes with any operator S whose expectation
value is a scalar. The proof is simple: ⟨ψ|S|ψ⟩, being a scalar, is not aﬀected
by rotations, so
⟨ψ′|S|ψ′⟩= ⟨ψ|U †(α) S U(α)|ψ⟩= ⟨ψ|S|ψ⟩.
(4.34)
Equating the operators on either side of the second equality and using U −1 =
U † we have [S, U] = 0. Restricting U to an inﬁnitesimal rotation gives
S ≃(1 + iδα · J) S (1 −iδα · J) = S + iδα · [J, S] + O(δα)2.
(4.35)
Since δα is arbitrary, it follows that
[J, S] = 0.
(4.36)
Among other things, this tells us that [J, x · x] = [J, p · p] = [J, x · p] = 0. It
is straightforward to check that these results are consistent with the vector
commutation relations (4.31) (Problem 4.1). It also follows that J2 = J · J
commutes with all of the Ji,
[J, J2] = 0.
(4.37)
Equations (4.33) and (4.37) imply that it is possible to ﬁnd a complete set
of simultaneous eigenstates for both J2 and any one component of J (but
only one).
The parity operator
Under a parity transform, coordinates behave as
x →Px = −x whereas quantum states transform as |ψ⟩→|ψ′⟩= P|ψ⟩, so
−⟨ψ|x|ψ⟩= P⟨ψ|x|ψ⟩= ⟨ψ′|x|ψ′⟩= ⟨ψ|P †xP|ψ⟩,
(4.38)
which implies that P †xP = −x or, since P is a unitary operator,
{x, P} ≡xP + Px = 0.
(4.39)
Two operators A and B for which {A, B} = 0 are said to anticommute,
with {A, B} being their anticommutator. The argument we have just given
for x works with x replaced by any vector operator v, so we always have
{v, P} = vP + Pv = 0.
(4.40)


4.2 Transformations of operators
67
This relation contains important information about the action of P. Suppose
|ω⟩is an eigenstate of a vector operator v with eigenvalues ω such that
v|ω⟩= ω|ω⟩. From equation (4.40) we see that
v|ω′⟩= v (P|ω⟩) = −Pv|ω⟩= −ωP|ω⟩= −ω|ω′⟩
(4.41)
so the parity-reversed state |ω′⟩= P|ω⟩is also an eigenstate of v, but the
eigenvalue has changed sign.
Let |±⟩be states of deﬁnite parity such that P|±⟩= ±|±⟩.
With
equation (4.40) we deduce that
−⟨±|v|±⟩= P⟨±|v|±⟩= ⟨±|P †vP|±⟩= (±)2⟨±|v|±⟩.
(4.42)
Since zero is the only number that is equal to minus itself, all vector operators
have vanishing expectation value in states of deﬁnite parity. More generally,
if |φ⟩and |χ⟩both have the same deﬁnite parity, equation (4.40) implies that
⟨φ|v|χ⟩= 0. We’ll use this result in Chapter 9.
We frequently encounter situations in which the potential energy V (x)
is an even function of x: V (−x) = V (x). We then say that the potential is
reﬂection-symmetric because the potential energy at −x is the same as it
is at the point x into which −x is mapped by reﬂection through the origin.
We now show that in such a case the parity operator commutes with the
Hamiltonian. For an arbitrary state |ψ⟩consider the amplitude
⟨x|PV |ψ⟩= ⟨−x|V |ψ⟩= V (−x)⟨−x|ψ⟩= V (x)⟨−x|ψ⟩,
(4.43a)
where we have used equation (4.16). On the other hand
⟨x|V P|ψ⟩= V (x)⟨x|P|ψ⟩= V (x)⟨−x|ψ⟩.
(4.43b)
Since x and |ψ⟩are arbitrary, it follows that when V is an even function of
x, [P, V ] = 0. This argument generalises to all operators that carry out a
transformation that is a symmetry of the potential energy.
Since the momentum p is a vector operator, Pp = −pP, so
p2P =
X
k
pkpkP = −
X
k
pkPpk =
X
k
Ppkpk = Pp2
⇒
[p2, P] = 0.
(4.44)
Applying these results to the Hamiltonian H = p2/2m + V (x) of a particle
of mass m that moves in a reﬂection-symmetric potential, we have that
[H, P] = 0.
It follows that for such a particle there is a complete set of
stationary states of well-deﬁned parity. This fact is illustrated by the case
of the harmonic oscillator studied in §3.1, and in Chapter 5 it will enable us
dramatically to simplify our calculations.
In classical physics, a vector product a×b is a pseudovector; it behaves
like an ordinary vector under rotations, but is invariant under parity, since
both a and b change sign.
We now show that expectation values of the
angular momentum operators, ⟨J⟩, are pseudovectors. If vi are components
of a vector operator, then combining equations (4.31) and (4.40), we obtain
{P, [vi, Jj]} = i
X
k
ǫijk{P, vk} = 0.
(4.45)
We use the identity (4.76) proved in Problem 4.8 to rewrite the left side of
this equation. We obtain
0 = {P, [vi, Jj]} = [{P, vi}, Jj] −{[P, Jj], vi} = −{[P, Jj], vi}.
(4.46)


68
Chapter 4: Transformations & Observables
Hence the operator [P, Jj] anticommutes with any component of an arbitrary
vector. Since P is deﬁned to have precisely this property, [P, Jj] must be
proportional to P, that is
[P, Jj] = λP,
(4.47)
where λ must be the same for all values of j because the three coordinate
directions are equivalent. Under rotations, the left side transforms like a vec-
tor, while the right side is invariant. This is possible only if both sides vanish.
Hence the parity operator commutes with all three angular-momentum op-
erators. It now follows that
⟨ψ′|J|ψ′⟩= ⟨ψ|P †JP|ψ⟩= ⟨ψ|J|ψ⟩,
(4.48)
so ⟨J⟩is unchanged by a parity transformation, and is a pseudovector.
Mirror operators
In §4.1.4 we introduced a typical mirror operator M.
To discover how M interacts with the position operators x and y we argue
that for any state |ψ⟩
⟨ψ|M †xM|ψ⟩= ⟨ψ|y|ψ⟩.
(4.49)
That is, in the state M|ψ⟩the expectation of x must be equal to the ex-
pectation value of y in the state |ψ⟩– the truth of this statement follows
immediately from the deﬁnition (4.19) of the state M|ψ⟩. Since equation
(4.49) holds for arbitrary |ψ⟩, we can infer the operator equation
M †xM = y
⇒
xM = My,
(4.50)
where the second equation follows by multiplying both sides of the ﬁrst equa-
tion by M and using the unitarity condition MM † = I. In the same way we
can show that Mx = yM, pxM = Mpy and pyM = Mpx.
4.3 Symmetries and conservation laws
Time changes states: in a given time interval t, the natural evolution of the
system causes any state |ψ, 0⟩to evolve to another state |ψ, t⟩. Equation
(2.32) gives an explicit expression for |ψ, t⟩. It is easy to see that with the
present notation this rule can be written
|ψ, t⟩= e−iHt/¯h|ψ, 0⟩,
(4.51)
where H is the Hamiltonian. The time-evolution operator
U(t) ≡e−iHt/¯h
(4.52)
is unitary, as we would expect.3
Now suppose that the generator τ of some displacement (a translation,
a rotation, or something similar) commutes with H. Since these operators
commute, their exponentials U(θ) (eq. 4.12) and U(t) also commute. Con-
sequently, for any state |ψ⟩
U(θ)U(t)|ψ⟩= U(t)U(θ)|ψ⟩.
(4.53)
3 The similarity between equations (4.52) and the formula (4.12) for a general unitary
transformation suggests that H is the generator of transformations in time. This is not
quite true.
If we were to push the system forward in time in the same way that we
translate it in x, we would delay the instant at which we would impose some given initial
conditions, with the result that it would be less evolved at a given time t. The time-
evolution operator, by contrast, makes the system older.
Hence H is the generator of
transformations backwards in time.


4.3 Symmetries & conservation laws
69
The left side is the state you get by waiting for time t and then displacing,
while the right side is the state obtained by displacing ﬁrst and then waiting.
So the equation says that the system evolves in the same way no matter where
you put it. That is, there is a connection between commuting observables and
invariance of the physics under displacements. Moreover, in §2.2.1 we saw
that when any operator Q commutes with the Hamiltonian, the expectation
value of any function of Q is a conserved quantity, and that in consequence,
a system that is initially in an eigenstate |qi⟩of Q remains in that eigenstate.
So whenever the physics is unchanged by a displacement, there is a conserved
quantity.
If [px, H] = 0, this argument implies that the system evolves in the same
way wherever it is located. We say that the Hamiltonian is translationally
invariant. It is a fundamental premise of physics that empty space is the same
everywhere, so the Hamiltonian of every isolated system is translationally
invariant. Consequently, when a system is isolated, the expectation value of
any function of the momentum operators is a conserved quantity, and, if the
system is started in a state of well-deﬁned momentum, it will stay in that
state. This is Newton’s ﬁrst law.
If [Jz, H] = 0, we say that the Hamiltonian is rotationally invariant
around the z axis, and our argument implies that the system evolves in the
same way no matter how it is turned around the z axis. The expectation
value of any function of Jz is constant, and if the state is initially in an
eigenstate of Jz with eigenvalue m, it will remain in that state. Consequently,
m is a good quantum number. In classical physics invariance of a system’s
dynamics under rotations around the z axis is associated with conservation
of the z component of the system’s angular momentum. This fact inspires
the identiﬁcation of ¯hJ with angular momentum.
Above we used a very general argument to infer that the existence of
a unitary operator that commutes with the Hamiltonian implies that the
system has a symmetry. In §4.1.4 an explicit calculation (eq. 4.43) showed
that reﬂection symmetry of the potential energy implied that the potential-
energy operator V commutes with the parity operator P. This argument
generalises to other transformation operators. For example, suppose V (x) is
invariant under some rotation V (R(α)x) = V (x). Then
⟨x|V U(α)|ψ⟩= V (x)⟨x|U(α)|ψ⟩= V (x)⟨R(α)x|ψ⟩,
(4.54a)
while
⟨x|U(α)V |ψ⟩= ⟨R(α)x|V |ψ⟩= V (R(α)x)⟨R(α)x|ψ⟩,
(4.54b)
so and the operator equation UV = V U follows from the equality of V (R(α)x)
and V (x).
In general, ﬁnding all the operators that commute with a given Hamilto-
nian is a very diﬃcult problem. However, it is sometimes possible to deduce
conserved quantities by direct inspection. For example, the Hamiltonian for
a system of n particles that interact with each other, but not with anything
else, is
H =
n
X
i=1
p2
i
2mi
+
X
i<j
V (xi −xj),
(4.55)
where the potential-energy function V only depends on the relative positions
of the individual particles. Such a Hamiltonian is invariant under translations
of all particles together (shifts of the centre of mass coordinate) and thus the
total momentum ptot = P
i pi of this system is conserved.
If the Hamiltonian is a scalar, then [H, J] = 0, [H, J2] = 0 and [H, P] = 0
(Problem 4.10), which implies conservation of angular momentum around
any axis, conservation of total angular momentum, and conservation of par-
ity. We have already seen that [J, J2] = [J, P] = 0, so for a scalar Hamilto-
nian we can ﬁnd complete sets of simultaneous eigenkets of H, P, J2, and
any one of the components of J.


70
Chapter 4: Transformations & Observables
The equation [H, P] = 0 implies that if you set up a system that at
t = 0 is a mirror image of a given system, it will evolve in exactly the same
way as the given system.
When the evolution of the mirrored system is
watched, it will appear identical to the evolution of the given system when
the latter is observed in a mirror. Hence, when [H, P] = 0, it is impossible
to tell whether a system that is being observed, is being watched directly or
through a mirror. One of the major surprises of 20th century physics was an
experiment by Wu et al.4 in 1957, which showed that you can see things in a
mirror that cannot happen in the real world! That is, there are Hamiltonians
for which [H, P]̸ = 0.
4.4 The Heisenberg picture
All physical predictions are extracted from the formalism of quantum me-
chanics by operating with a bra on a ket to extract a complex number: we
either calculate the amplitude for some event as A = ⟨φ|ψ⟩or the expecta-
tion value of a observable through ⟨Q⟩= ⟨ψ|Qψ⟩, where |Qψ⟩≡Q|ψ⟩. In
general our predictions are time-dependent because the state of our system
evolves in time according to
|ψ, t⟩= U(t)|ψ, 0⟩,
(4.56)
where the time-evolution operator U is deﬁned by equation (4.52).
With every operator of interest we can associate a new time-dependent
operator
eQt ≡U †(t)QU(t).
(4.57)
Then at any time t the expectation value of Q can be written
⟨Q⟩t = ⟨ψ, t|Q|ψ, t⟩= ⟨ψ, 0|U †(t)QU(t)|ψ, 0⟩= ⟨ψ, 0| eQt|ψ, 0⟩.
(4.58)
That is, the expectation value at time t = 0 of the new operator eQt is
equal to the expectation value of the original, physical, operator Q at time t.
Similarly, when we wish to calculate an amplitude ⟨φ, t|ψ, t⟩for something
to happen at time t, we can argue that on account of the unitarity of U(t)
it is equal to a corresponding amplitude at time zero:
⟨φ, t|ψ, t⟩= ⟨φ, 0|ψ, 0⟩
where
|φ, t⟩≡U(t)|φ, 0⟩.
(4.59)
Thus if we work with the new time-dependent operators such as eQt, the
only states we require are those at t = 0.
This formalism, is called the
Heisenberg picture to distinguish it from the Schr¨odinger picture in
which states evolve and operators are normally time-independent.
As we have seen, classical mechanics applies in the limit that it is suﬃ-
cient to calculate the expectation values of observables, and is concerned with
solving the equations of motion of these expectation values. In the Heisen-
berg picture quantum mechanics is concerned with solving the equations of
motion of the time-dependent operators eQt, etc. Consequently, there is a
degree of similarity between the Heisenberg picture and classical mechanics.
It is straightforward to determine the equation of motion of eQt: we
simply diﬀerentiate equation (4.57)
d eQt
dt = dU †
dt QU + U †QdU
dt .
(4.60)
4 Wu, C.S., Ambler, E., Hayward, R.W., Hoppes, D.D. & Hudson, R.P., 1957, Phys.
Rev., 105, 1413


4.5 The essence of quantum mechanics
71
But diﬀerentiating equation (4.52) we have
dU
dt = −iH
¯h U
⇒
dU †
dt
= iH
¯h U †,
(4.61)
where we have taken advantage of the fact that U is a function of H and
therefore commutes with it. Inserting these expressions into equation (4.60)
we obtain
i¯hd eQt
dt = −HU †QU + U †QUH
= [ eQt, H].
(4.62)
This result is similar to Ehrenfest’s theorem (eq. 2.34) as it has to be because
Ehrenfest’s theorem must be recovered if we pre- and post-multiply each side
by the time-independent state |ψ, 0⟩.
The Heisenberg picture is most widely used in the quantum theory of
ﬁelds. In this theory one needs essentially only one state, the vacuum in the
remote past |0⟩, which we assume was empty. Excitations of the vacuum
are interpreted as particles, each mode of excitation being associated with a
diﬀerent type of particle (photons, electron, up-quarks, etc). The theory is
concerned with the dynamics of operators that excite the vacuum, creating
particles, which then propagate to other locations, where they are detected
(annihilated) by similar operators. Sometimes one mode of excitation of the
vacuum morphs into one or more diﬀerent modes of the vacuum, and such an
event is interpreted as the decay of one type of particle into other particles.
The amplitude for any such sequence of events is obtained as a number of the
form ⟨0| eA1 eA2 . . . eAn|0⟩, where the operators eAi are creation or annihilation
operators for the appropriate particles in the Heisenberg picture.
4.5 What is the essence of quantum mechanics?
It is sometimes said that commutation relations such as [xi, pj] = i¯hδij and
[Ji, Jj] = i P
k ǫijkJk are inherently quantum mechanical, but this is not true.
Take for example an ordinary classical rotation matrix R(α) which ro-
tates spatial vectors as v →v′ = R(α)v. Deﬁne matrices Jx, Jy and Jz
via
exp (−iα · J ) ≡R(α),
(4.63)
where the exponential of a matrix is deﬁned in terms of the power series for
ex. Clearly, the Ji must be 3 × 3 matrices, and, since R(α) is real and the
angles α are arbitrary, the Ji must be pure imaginary. Finally, orthogonality
of R requires
I = RT(α)R(α) = exp(−iα · J )T exp(−iα · J )
= exp(−iα · J T) exp(−iα · J )
(4.64)
We express α in terms of the angle of the rotation it represents, θ = |α|,
and the direction n = α/|α| of the rotation axis, and then we diﬀerentiate
equation (4.64) with respect to θ. We obtain
0 = −in · J T exp(−iθn · J T) exp(−iθn · J )
+ exp(−iθn · J T) exp(−iθn · J )(−in · J )
= −in · {J T + J }.
(4.65)
Since n is an arbitrary unit vector, it now follows that J T
i
= −Ji, so Ji
is antisymmetric. A pure imaginary antisymmetric matrix is a Hermitian
matrix. Thus the Ji are Hermitian.


72
Chapter 4: Transformations & Observables
For any two vectors α and β, it is easy to show that the product
RT(α)R(β)R(α) is an orthogonal matrix with determinant +1, so it is a
rotation matrix. It leaves the vector β′ ≡R(−α)β = RT(α)β invariant:
n
RT(α)R(β)R(α)
o
β′ = RT(α)R(β)β = RT(α)β = β′.
(4.66)
Hence β′ is the axis of this rotation. Therefore
RT(α)R(β)R(α) = R(β′) = R(R(−α)β).
(4.67)
In Box 4.3 we showed that when |α| is inﬁnitesimal, R(−α)β ≃β −α × β,
so when β is also inﬁnitesimal, equation (4.67) can be written in terms of
the classical generators (4.63) as
(1 + iα · J ) (1 −iβ · J ) (1 −iα · J ) ≃1 −i(β −α × β) · J .
(4.68)
The zeroth order terms (‘1’) and those involving only α or β cancel, but the
terms involving both α and β cancel only if
αiβj[Ji, Jj] = iαiβj
X
k
ǫijkJk.
(4.69)
This equation can hold for all directions α and β only if the Ji satisfy
[Ji, Jj] = i
X
k
ǫijkJk,
(4.70)
which is identical to the ‘quantum’ commutation relation (4.33). Our red-
erivation of these commutation relations from entirely classical considerations
is possible because the relations reﬂect the fact that the order in which you
rotate an object around two diﬀerent axes matters (Problem 4.6). This is
a statement about the geometry of space that has to be recognised by both
quantum and classical mechanics.
In Appendix D it is shown that in classical statistical mechanics, each
component of position, xi, and momentum, pi, is associated with a Hermi-
tian operator ˆxi or ˆpi that acts on functions on phase space. The operator
ˆpi generates translations along xi, while ˆxi generates translations along pi
(boosts). The operators ˆLi associated with angular momentum satisfy the
commutation relation [ˆLx, ˆLy] = iHˆLz, where H is a number with the same
dimensions as ¯h and a magnitude that depends on how ˆxi and ˆpi are nor-
malised.
If the form of the commutation relations is not special to quantum me-
chanics, what is? In quantum mechanics, complete information about any
system is contained in its ket |ψ⟩. There is nothing else. From |ψ⟩we can
evaluate amplitudes such as ⟨x, µ|ψ⟩for the system to be found at x with
orientation µ. If we do not care about µ, the total probability for |ψ⟩to be
found at x is
Prob(at x|ψ) =
X
µ
⟨x, µ|ψ⟩
2.
(4.71)
Eigenstates of the x operator with eigenvalue x0 are states in which the
system is deﬁnitely at x0, while eigenstates of the p operator with eigenvalue
¯hk are states in which the system deﬁnitely has momentum ¯hk.
By contrast, in classical statistical mechanics we declare at the outset
that a well deﬁned state is one that has deﬁnite values for all measurable
quantities, so it has a deﬁnite position, momentum, orientation etc. The
eigenfunctions of ˆp or ˆL do not represent states of deﬁnite momentum or
angular momentum, because we have already deﬁned what such states are.
Classical statistical mechanics knows nothing about probability ampli-
tudes, but interprets the functions on phase space on which ˆp or ˆL act


Problems
73
as probability distributions. This is possible because, as we show in Ap-
pendix D, the integral of such a distribution can be normalised to one and is
conserved. We can certainly expand any such distribution in the eigenfunc-
tions of, say ˆp. However, as in quantum mechanics the expansion coeﬃcients
will not be positive – in fact, they will generally be complex. Hence they
cannot be interpreted as probabilities. What makes quantum mechanics fun-
damentally diﬀerent is its reliance on complex quantum amplitudes, and the
physical interpretation that it gives to a functional expansion through the
fundamental rule (1.11) for adding quantum amplitudes. Quantum mechan-
ics is therefore naturally formulated in terms of states |ψ⟩that inhabit a
complex vector space of arbitrary dimension – a so called Hilbert space.
These states may always be expanded in terms of a complete set of eigen-
states of a Hermitian operator, and the (complex) expansion coeﬃcients have
a simple physical interpretation.
Classical statistical mechanics is restricted to probabilities, which have
to be real, non-negative numbers and are therefore never expansion coeﬃ-
cients. Quantum and classical mechanics incorporate the same commutation
relations, however, because, as we stressed in §4.2, these follow from the
geometry of space. From a mathematician’s perspective, the commutation
relations of quantum-mechanical operators and the operators of classical sta-
tistical physics have to be the same because both systems of operators pro-
vide representations of the ‘Lie algebra’ of the same mathematical group
(Appendix E).
Problems
4.1
Verify that [J, x · x] = 0 and [J, x · p] = 0 by using the commutation
relations [xi, Jj] = i P
k ǫijkxk and [pi, Jj] = i P
k ǫijkpk.
4.2∗
Show that the vector product a×b of two classical vectors transforms
like a vector under rotations. Hint: A rotation matrix R satisﬁes the relations
R · RT = I and det(R) = 1, which in tensor notation read P
p RipRtp = δit
and P
ijk ǫijkRirRjsRkt = ǫrst.
4.3∗
We have shown that [vi, Jj] = i P
k ǫijkvk for any operator whose
components vi form a vector. The expectation value of this operator relation
in any state |ψ⟩is then ⟨ψ|[vi, Jj]|ψ⟩= i P
k ǫijk⟨ψ|vk|ψ⟩. Check that with
U(α) = e−iα·J this relation is consistent under a further rotation |ψ⟩→
|ψ′⟩= U(α)|ψ⟩by evaluating both sides separately.
4.4∗
The matrix for rotating an ordinary vector by φ around the z axis is
R(φ) ≡


cos φ
−sin φ
0
sin φ
cos φ
0
0
0
1


(4.72)
By considering the form taken by R for inﬁnitesimal φ calculate from R the
matrix Jz that appears in R(φ) = exp(−iJzφ). Introduce new coordinates
u1 ≡(−x+iy)/√2, u2 = z and u3 ≡(x+iy)/√2. Write down the matrix M
that appears in u = M · x [where x ≡(x, y, z)] and show that it is unitary.
Then show that
J ′
z ≡M · Jz · M†.
(4.73)
is identical with Sz in the set of spin-one Pauli analogues
Sx =
1
√2


0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0

,
Sy =
1
√2


0
−i
0
i
0
−i
0
i
0

,
Sz =


1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−1

.
(4.74)
Write down the matrix Jx whose exponential generates rotations around
the x axis, calculate J ′
x by analogy with equation (4.73) and check that
your result agrees with Sx in the set (4.74). Explain as fully as you can the
meaning of these calculations.


74
Problems
4.5
Determine the commutator [J ′
x, J ′
z] of the generators used in Problem
4.4. Show that it is equal to −iJ ′
y, where J ′
y is identical with Sy in the set
(4.74).
4.6∗
Show that if α and β are non-parallel vectors, α is not invariant under
the combined rotation R(α)R(β). Hence show that RT(β)RT(α)R(β)R(α)
is not the identity operation. Explain the physical signiﬁcance of this result.
4.7∗
In this problem you derive the wavefunction
⟨x|p⟩= eip·x/¯h
(4.75)
of a state of well deﬁned momentum from the properties of the translation op-
erator U(a). The state |k⟩is one of well-deﬁned momentum ¯hk. How would
you characterise the state |k′⟩≡U(a)|k⟩? Show that the wavefunctions of
these states are related by uk′(x) = e−ia·kuk(x) and uk′(x) = uk(x −a).
Hence obtain equation (4.75).
4.8
By expanding the anticommutator on the left and then applying the
third rule of the set (2.22), show that any three operators satisfy the identity
[{A, B}, C] = {A, [B, C]} + {[A, C], B}.
(4.76)
4.9
Deﬁne G in terms of the parity operator P by
G ≡1
2(1 −P).
(4.77)
Show that G is Hermitian and that Gn = G for positive integer n. Explain
this result in terms of the eigenkets and eigenvalues of G. Show further that
P = U(π) where U(s) ≡eisG.
4.10
Let P be the parity operator and S an arbitrary scalar operator.
Explain why P and S must commute.
4.11
In this problem we consider discrete transformations other than that
associated with parity. Let S be a linear transformation on ordinary three-
dimensional space that eﬀects a a reﬂection in a plane. Let S be the asso-
ciated operator on kets. Explain the physical relationship between the kets
|ψ⟩and |ψ′⟩≡S|ψ⟩. Explain why we can write
S⟨ψ|x|ψ⟩= ⟨ψ|S†xS|ψ⟩.
(4.78)
What are the possible eigenvalues of S?
Given that S reﬂects in the plane through the origin with unit normal
ˆn, show, by means of a diagram or otherwise, that its matrix is given by
Sij = δij −2ninj.
(4.79)
Determine the form of this matrix in the case that n = (1, −1, 0)/√2. Show
that in this case Sx = yS and give an alternative expression for Sy.
Show that a potential of the form
V (x) = f(R) + λxy,
where
R ≡
p
x2 + y2
(4.80)
satisﬁes V (Sx) = V (x) and explain the geometrical signiﬁcance of this equa-
tion. Show that [S, V ] = 0. Given that E is an eigenvalue of H = p2/2m+V
that has a unique eigenket |E⟩, what equation does |E⟩satisfy in addition
to H|E⟩= E|E⟩?
4.12
Show that the operator deﬁned by ⟨x, y|S|ψ⟩= ⟨y, x|ψ⟩is Hermitian.


5
Motion in step potentials
We follow up our study of the harmonic oscillator by looking at motion in
a wider range of one-dimensional potentials V (x). The potentials we study
will be artiﬁcial in that they will only vary in sharp steps, but they will
enable us to explore analytically some features of quantum mechanics that
are generic and hidden from us in the classical limit. We start by considering
a particle that is trapped in a potential well and go on to consider a particle
that has a choice of two wells. We ﬁnd that in this case it can move between
these wells in violation of classical mechanics, and we use this simple system
to mode the operation of an ammonia maser. In §5.3 we ask how potential
wells and barriers aﬀect the motion of a free particle – one that can escape
to inﬁnity. We ﬁnd that whereas in classical mechanics the particle is never
reﬂected by a potential well, in quantum mechanics there is generally a non-
zero amplitude for such reﬂection. We ﬁnd also that particles can “tunnel”
through barriers that classically would certainly reﬂect them.
5.1 Square potential well
We look for energy eigenstates of a particle that moves in the potential
(Figure 5.1)
V (x) =

0
for |x| < a
V0 > 0
otherwise.
(5.1)
Since V is an even function of x, the Hamiltonian (2.51) commutes with the
parity operator P (page 67). So there is a complete set of energy eigenstates
of well deﬁned parity. The wavefunctions u(x) ≡⟨x|E⟩of these states will
be either even or odd functions of x, and this fact will greatly simplify the
job of determining u(x).
In the position representation, the governing equation (the tise 2.33)
reads
−¯h2
2m
d2u
dx2 + V (x)u = Eu.
(5.2)
On account of the step-like nature of V , equation (5.2) reduces to a pair of


76
Chapter 5: Motion in step potentials
Figure 5.1 The dotted line shows the square-well potential V (x). The full curve shows
the ground-state wavefunction.
extremely simple equations,
d2u
dx2 = −2mE
¯h2 u
for |x| < a
d2u
dx2 = 2m(V0 −E)
¯h2
u
otherwise.
(5.3)
We restrict ourselves to solutions that describe a particle that is bound by
the potential well in the sense that E < V0.1 Then the solution to the second
equation is u(x) = Ae±Kx, where A is a constant and
K ≡
s
2m(V0 −E)
¯h2
.
(5.4)
If u is to be normalisable, it must vanish as |x| →∞. So at x > a we have
u(x) = Ae−Kx, and at x < −a we have u(x) = ±Ae+Kx, where the plus
sign is required for solutions of even parity, and the minus sign is required
for odd parity.
For E > 0, the solution to the ﬁrst of equations (5.3) is either u(x) =
B cos(kx) or u(x) = B sin(kx) depending on the parity, where
k ≡
r
2mE
¯h2 .
(5.5)
So far we have ensured that u(x) solves the tise everywhere except
at |x| = a. Unless u is continuous at these points, du/dx will be arbitrarily
large, and d2u/dx2 will be undeﬁned, so u will not satisfy the tise. Similarly,
unless du/dx is continuous at these points, d2u/dx2 will be arbitrarily large,
so u cannot solve the tise. Therefore, we require that both u and du/dx are
continuous at x = a, that is
B cos(ka) = Ae−Ka
−kB sin(ka) = −KAe−Ka
)
or
(
B sin(ka) = Ae−Ka
kB cos(ka) = −KAe−Ka
(5.6)
where the ﬁrst pair of equations apply in the case of even parity and the
second in the case of odd parity. It is easy to show that once these equa-
tions have been satisﬁed, the corresponding equations for x = −a will be
automatically satisﬁed.
1 By considering the behaviour of u near the origin we can prove that E > 0.


5.1 Square potential well
77
Figure 5.2 Plots of the left (full) and right (dashed) sides of equation (5.8) for the case
W = 10.
Figure 5.3 A square well inscribed in a general well.
We eliminate A and B from equations (5.6) by dividing the second
equation in each set by the ﬁrst. In the case of even parity we obtain
k tan(ka) = K =
r
2mV0
¯h2
−k2.
(5.7)
This is an algebraic equation for k, which controls E through (5.5). Before
attempting to solve this equation, it is useful to rewrite it as
tan(ka) =
s
W 2
(ka)2 −1
where
W ≡
r
2mV0a2
¯h2
.
(5.8)
W and ka are dimensionless variables. The left and right sides of equation
(5.8) are plotted as functions of ka in Figure 5.2. Since for ka = 0 the graphs
of the two sides start at the origin and inﬁnity, and the graph of the left side
increases to inﬁnity at ka = π/2 while the graph of the left side terminates
at ka = W, the equation always has at least one solution. Thus no matter
how small V0 and a are, the square well can always trap the particle. The
bigger W is, the more solutions the equation has; a second solution appears
at W = π, a third at W = 2π, etc.
Analogously one can show that for an odd-parity energy eigenstate to
exist, we must have W > π/2 and that additional solutions appear when
W = (2r + 1)π/2 for r = 1, 2, . . . (Problem 5.5).
From a naive perspective our discovery that no matter how narrow or
shallow it is, a square potential well always has at least one bound state,
conﬂicts with the uncertainty principle: the particle’s momentum cannot
exceed pmax =
√
2mE < √2mV0 and can have either sign, so if the particle
were conﬁned within the well, the product of the uncertainties in p and x
would be less than 4apmax < 4√2mV0a2 = 4¯hW, which tends to zero with
W. The resolution of this apparent paradox is that for W ≪1 the particle is
not conﬁned within the well; there is a non-negligible probability of ﬁnding
the particle in the classically forbidden region |x| > a. In the limit W →0
the particle is conﬁned by a well in which it is certain never to be found!


78
Chapter 5: Motion in step potentials
Figure 5.4 The wavefunctions of the lowest three stationary states of the inﬁnitely deep
square well: ground state (full); ﬁrst excited state (dashed); second excited state (dotted).
Our result that a square well always has a bound state can be extended
to potential wells of any shape: given the potential well U sketched in Fig-
ure 5.3, we consider the square well shown by the dashed line in the ﬁgure.
Since this shallower and narrower well has a bound state, we infer that the
potential U also has at least one bound state.
5.1.1 Limiting cases
(a) Inﬁnitely deep well
It is worthwhile to investigate the behaviour
of these solutions as V0 →∞with a ﬁxed, when the well becomes inﬁnitely
deep.
Then W →∞and the dashed curve in Figure 5.2 moves higher
and higher up the paper and hits the x axis further and further to the
right. Consequently, the values of ka that solve equation (5.8) tend towards
ka = (2r + 1)π/2, so the even-parity energy eigenfunctions become
u(x) =
n A cos[(2r + 1)πx/2a]
|x| < a
0
otherwise.
(5.9)
This solution has a discontinuity in its gradient at x = a because it is the
limit of solutions in which the curvature K for x > a diverges to inﬁnity. The
odd-parity solutions are obtained by replacing the cosine with sin(sπx/a),
where s = 1, 2, . . ., which again vanish at the edge of the well (Figure 5.4).
From this example we infer the principle that wavefunctions vanish at the
edges of regions of inﬁnite potential energy.
The energy of any stationary state of an inﬁnite square potential well
can be obtained from
En = n2
8m
¯hπ
a
2
,
where
n = 1, 2, . . .
(5.10)
The particle’s momentum when it is in the ground state (n = 1) is of order
¯hk = ¯hπ/2a and of undetermined sign, so the uncertainty in the momentum
is ∆p ≃¯hπ/a. The uncertainty in the particle’s position is ∆x ≃2a, so
∆x∆p ≃2¯hπ, consistent with the uncertainty principle (§2.3.2).
(b) Inﬁnitely narrow well
In §11.5.1 we will study a model of covalent
bonding that involves the potential obtained by letting the width of the
square well tend to zero as the well becomes deeper and deeper in such a
way that the product V0a remains constant. In this limit W ∝a√V0 (eq. 5.8)
tends to zero, so there is only one bound state and it will be an even-parity
state.
Rather than obtaining the wavefunction and energy of this state from
formulae already in hand, it is more convenient to reformulate the problem
using a diﬀerent normalisation for the energy: we now set V to zero outside
the well, so V becomes negative at interior points. Then we can write V (x) =
−Vδδ(x), where δ(x) is the Dirac delta function and Vδ > 0. The tise now
reads
−¯h2
2m
d2u
dx2 −Vδδ(x)u = Eu.
(5.11)


5.2 A pair of square wells
79
Figure 5.5 Wavefunction of a particle trapped by a very narrow, deep potential well.
Integrating the equation from x = −ǫ to x = ǫ with ǫ inﬁnitesimal, we ﬁnd
−
du
dx
ǫ
−ǫ
= 2m
¯h2

Vδu(0) + E
Z ǫ
−ǫ
dx u

.
(5.12)
Since u is ﬁnite, the integral on the right can be made as small as we please
by letting ǫ →0. Hence the content of equation (5.12) is that du/dx has a
discontinuity at the origin:
du
dx
ǫ
−ǫ
= −2mVδ
¯h2
u(0).
(5.13)
Since we know that the solution we seek has even parity, it is of the
form u(x) = Ae∓Kx, where the minus sign applies for x > 0 (Figure 5.5).
Substituting this form of u into (5.13) and dividing through by 2A we have
K = mVδ
¯h2 .
(5.14)
Inserting u = e−Kx into equation (5.11) at x > 0 we ﬁnd that E = −¯h2K2/2m,
so the energy of a particle that is bound to a δ-function potential is
E = −mV 2
δ
2¯h2 .
(5.15)
Figure 5.5 shows that |ψ(x)|2 is ﬁnite in the well, and the well in inﬁnitely
narrow, so the probability of ﬁnding the particle in the well is zero – the
particle is certain never to be in the well that traps it! This result is an
extreme case of the phenomenon we discussed apropos the application of the
uncertainty principle to a shallow well of ﬁnite depth.
5.2 A pair of square wells
Some important phenomena can be illustrated by considering motion in a
pair of potentials that are separated by a barrier of ﬁnite height and width.
Figure 5.6 shows the potential
V (x) =
( V0
for |x| < a
0
for a < |x| < b
∞
otherwise.
(5.16)
Since the potential is an even function of x, we may assume that the energy
eigenfunctions that we seek are of well-deﬁned parity.
For simplicity we take the potential to be inﬁnite for |x| > b, and we
assume that the particle is classically forbidden in the region |x| < a. Then
in this region the wavefunction must be of the form u(x) = A cosh(Kx)
or u(x) = A sinh(Kx) depending on parity, and K is given by (5.4).
In
the region a < x < b the wavefunction may be taken to be of the form
u(x) = B sin(kx + φ), where B, and φ are constants to be determined and k


80
Chapter 5: Motion in step potentials
Figure 5.6 A double potential well with b/a = 5.
Figure 5.7 Full curves: the left side of equation (5.19) for the case W = 3.5, b = 5a.
Each vertical section is associated with a diﬀerent value of the integer r. The right side is
shown by the dotted curve for even parity, and the dashed curve for odd parity.
is related to the energy by (5.5). From our study of a single square well we
know that u must vanish at x = b, so
sin(kb + φ) = 0
⇒
φ = rπ −kb
with
r = 0, 1, . . .
(5.17)
Again by analogy with the case of a single square well, we require u and its
derivative to be continuous at x = a, so (depending on parity)
cosh(Ka) = B sin(ka + φ)
K sinh(Ka) = kB cos(ka + φ)

or

sinh(Ka) = B sin(ka + φ)
K cosh(Ka) = kB cos(ka + φ).
(5.18)
Once these equations have been solved, the corresponding conditions at
x = −a will be automatically satisﬁed if for −b < x < −a we take u =
±B sin(k|x| + φ), using the plus sign in the even-parity case.
Using (5.17) to eliminate φ from equations (5.18) and then proceeding
in close analogy with the working below equations (5.6), we ﬁnd
tan [rπ −k(b −a)]
s
W 2
(ka)2 −1 =



coth
p
W 2 −(ka)2

even parity
tanh
p
W 2 −(ka)2

odd parity,
(5.19)
where W is deﬁned by equation (5.8).


5.2 A pair of square wells
81
Figure 5.8 The ground state (full curve) and the associated odd-parity state (dashed
curve) of the double square-well potential (shown dotted).
The left and right sides of equation (5.19) are plotted in Figure 5.7; the
values of ka for stationary states correspond to intersections of the steeply
sloping curves of the left side with the initially horizontal curves of the right
side. The smallest value of ka is associated with the ground state. The values
come in pairs, one for an even-parity state, and one very slightly larger for
an odd-parity state. The diﬀerence between the k values in a pair increases
with k.
The closeness of the k values in a given pair ensures that in the right-
hand well (a < x < b) the wavefunctions ue(x) and uo(x) of the even- and
odd-parity states are very similar, and that in the left-hand well ue and uo
diﬀer by little more than sign – see Figure 5.8. Moreover, when the k values
are similar, the amplitude of the wavefunction is small in the classically
forbidden region |x| < a. Hence, the linear combinations
ψ±(x) ≡
1
√2 [ue(x) ± uo(x)]
(5.20)
are the wavefunctions of a state |ψ+⟩in which the particle is almost certain
to be in the right-hand well, and a state |ψ−⟩in which it is equally certain
to be in the left-hand well.
Consider now how the system evolves if at time 0 it is in the state |ψ+⟩,
so the particle is in the right-hand well. Then by equation (2.32) at time t
its wavefunction is
ψ(x, t) =
1
√2
h
ue(x)e−iEet/¯h + uo(x)e−iEot/¯hi
=
1
√2e−iEet/¯h h
ue(x) + uo(x)e−i(Eo−Ee)t/¯hi
.
(5.21)
After a time T = π¯h/(Eo −Ee) the exponential in the square brackets on the
second line of this equation equals −1, so to within an overall phase factor
the wavefunction has become [ue(x) −uo(x)]/√2, implying that the particle
is certainly in the left-hand well; we say that in the interval T the particle has
tunnelled through the barrier that divides the wells. After a further period
T it is certainly in the right-hand well, and so on ad inﬁnitum. In classical
physics the particle would stay in whatever well it was in initially. In fact, the
position of a familiar light switch is governed by a potential that consists of
two similar adjacent potential wells, and such switches most deﬁnitely do not
oscillate between their on and oﬀpositions. We do not observe tunnelling in
the classical regime because Eo −Ee decreases with increasing W faster than
e−2W (Problem 5.16), so the time required for tunnelling to occur increases
faster than e2W and is enormously long for classical systems such as light
switches.
5.2.1 Ammonia
Nature provides us with a beautiful physical realisation of a system with a
double potential well in the ammonia molecule NH3. Ammonia contains four


82
Chapter 5: Motion in step potentials
Figure 5.9 The two possible relative locations of nitrogen and hydrogen atoms in NH3.
nuclei and ten electrons, so is really a very complicated dynamical system.
However, in §11.5.2 we shall show that a useful way of thinking about the
low-energy behaviour of molecules is to imagine that the electrons provide
light springs, which hold the nuclei together. The nuclei oscillate around the
equilibrium positions deﬁned by the potential energy of these springs. In
the case of NH3, the potential energy is minimised when the three hydrogen
atoms are arranged at the vertices of an equilateral triangle, while the ni-
trogen atom lies some distance x away from the plane of the triangle, either
‘above’ or ‘below’ it (see Figure 5.9). Hence if we were to plot the molecule’s
potential energy as a function of x, we would obtain a graph that looked like
Figure 5.6 except that the sides of the wells would be sloping rather than
straight. This function would yield eigenenergies that came in pairs, as in
our square-well example.
In many physical situations the molecule would have so little energy that
it could have negligible amplitudes to be found in any but the two lowest-
lying stationary states, and we would obtain an excellent approximation to
the dynamics of ammonia by including only the amplitudes to be found in
these two states. We now use Dirac notation to study this dynamics.
Let |+⟩be the state whose wavefunction is analogous to the wavefunction
ψ+(x) deﬁned above in the case of the double square well; then ψ+(x) =
⟨x|+⟩, and in the state |+⟩the N atom is certainly above the plane containing
the H atoms. The ket |−⟩is the complementary state in which the N atom
lies below the plane of the H atoms.
The |±⟩states are linear combinations of the eigenkets |e⟩and |o⟩of the
Hamiltonian:
|±⟩=
1
√2(|e⟩± |o⟩).
(5.22)
In the |±⟩basis the matrix elements of the Hamiltonian H are
⟨+|H|+⟩= 1
2(⟨e| + ⟨o|)H(|e⟩+ |o⟩) = 1
2(Ee + Eo)
⟨+|H|−⟩= 1
2(⟨e| + ⟨o|)H(|e⟩−|o⟩) = 1
2(Ee −Eo)
⟨−|H|−⟩= 1
2(⟨e| −⟨o|)H(|e⟩−|o⟩) = 1
2(Ee + Eo)
(5.23)
Bearing in mind that H is represented by a Hermitian matrix, we conclude
that it is
H =

E
−A
−A
E

,
(5.24)
where E = 1
2(Ee + Eo) and A ≡1
2(Eo −Ee) are both positive.
Now the electronic structure of NH3 is such that the N atom carries
a small negative charge −q, with a corresponding positive charge +q dis-
tributed among the H atoms. With NH3 in either the |+⟩or |−⟩state there
is a net separation of charge, so an ammonia molecule in these states pos-
sesses an electric dipole moment of magnitude qs directed perpendicular to
the plane of H atoms (see Figure 5.9), where s is a small distance.
Below equation (5.21) we saw that a molecule that is initially in the
state |+⟩will subsequently oscillate between this state and the state |−⟩at
a frequency (Eo −Ee)/2π¯h = A/π¯h. Hence a molecule that starts in the
state |+⟩is an oscillating dipole and it will emit electromagnetic radiation


5.2 A pair of square wells
83
Figure 5.10 Energy levels of the
ammonia molecule as a function of
external electric ﬁeld strength E.
The quantity plotted, ∆E = E −E.
at the frequency A/π¯h. This proves to be 150 GHz, so the molecule emits
microwave radiation.
The ammonia maser
The energy 2A that separates the ground and ﬁrst
excited states of ammonia in zero electric ﬁeld is small, 10−4 eV. Conse-
quently at room temperature similar numbers of molecules are in these two
states. The principle of an ammonia maser2 is to isolate the molecules that
are in the ﬁrst excited state, and then to harvest the radiation that is emit-
ted as the molecules decay to the ground state. The isolation is achieved
by exploiting the fact that, as we now show, when an electric ﬁeld is ap-
plied, molecules in the ground and ﬁrst excited states develop polarisations
of opposite sign.
We deﬁne the dipole-moment operator P by
P|+⟩= −qs|+⟩
;
P|−⟩= +qs|−⟩,
(5.25)
so a molecule in the |+⟩state has dipole moment −qs and a molecule in the
|−⟩state has dipole moment +qs.3 To measure this dipole moment, we can
place the molecule in an electric ﬁeld of magnitude E parallel to the dipole
axis. Since the energy of interaction between a dipole P and an electric ﬁeld
E is −PE, the new Hamiltonian is
H =

E + qEs
−A
−A
E −qEs

.
(5.26)
This new Hamiltonian has eigenvalues
E± = E ±
p
A2 + (qEs)2.
(5.27)
These are plotted as a function of ﬁeld E in Figure 5.10. When E = 0 the
energy levels are the same as before.
As E slowly increases, E increases
quadratically with E, because
p
A2 + (qEs)2 ≃A + (qEs)2/2A, but when
E ≫A/qs the energy eigenvalues change linearly with E. Notice that in this
large-ﬁeld limit, at lowest order the energy levels do not depend on A.
The physical interpretation of these results is the following.
In the
absence of an electric ﬁeld, the energy eigenstates are the states of well-
deﬁned parity |e⟩and |o⟩, which have no dipole moment. An electric ﬁeld
breaks the symmetry between the two potential wells, making it energetically
favourable for the N atom to occupy the well to which the electric ﬁeld is
pushing it. Consequently, the ground state develops a dipole moment P,
which is proportional to E. Thus at this stage the electric contribution to
the energy of the ground state, which is −PE, is proportional to E2. Once
2 ‘maser’ is an acronym for “microwave ampliﬁcation by stimulated emission of radiation”.
3 The N atom is negatively charged so the dipole points away from it.


84
Chapter 5: Motion in step potentials
this contribution exceeds the separation A between the states of well-deﬁned
parity, the molecule has shifted to the lower-energy state of the pair |±⟩,
and it stays in this state as the electric ﬁeld is increased further. Thus for
large ﬁelds the polarisation of the ground state is independent of E and the
electric contribution to the energy is simply proportional to E.
While the ground state develops a dipole moment that lowers its energy,
the ﬁrst excited state develops the opposite polarisation, so the electric ﬁeld
raises the energy of this state, as shown in Figure 5.10. The response of the
ﬁrst excited state is anomalous from a classical perspective.
Ehrenfest’s theorem (2.57) tells us that the expectation values of oper-
ators obey classical equations of motion. In particular the momentum of a
molecule obeys
d ⟨px⟩
dt
= −
∂V
∂x

,
(5.28)
where x is a Cartesian coordinate of the molecule’s centre of mass.
The
potential depends on x only through the electric ﬁeld E, so
∂V
∂x = −P ∂E
∂x,
(5.29)
from which it follows that
d ⟨px⟩
dt
= ⟨P⟩∂E
∂x.
(5.30)
Since the sign of ⟨P⟩and therefore the force on a molecule depends on
whether the molecule is in the ground or ﬁrst excited state, when a jet of
ammonia passes through a region of varying E, molecules in the ﬁrst excited
state can be separated from those in the ground state.
Having gathered the molecules that are in the excited state, we lead
them to a cavity that resonates with the 150 GHz radiation that is emitted
when molecules drop into the ground state. The operation of an ammonia
maser by Charles Townes and colleagues4 was the ﬁrst demonstration of
stimulated emission and opened up the revolution in science and technology
that lasers have have since wrought.
5.3 Scattering of free particles
We now consider what happens when a particle that is travelling parallel
to the x axis encounters a region of sharply changed potential energy. In
classical physics the outcome depends critically on whether the potential
rises by more than the kinetic energy of the incoming particle: if it does, the
particle is certainly reﬂected, while it continues moving towards positive x in
the contrary case. We shall ﬁnd that quantum mechanics predicts that there
are usually non-vanishing probabilities for both reﬂection and transmission
regardless of whether the rise in potential exceeds the initial kinetic energy.
We assume that each particle has well-deﬁned energy E, so its wave-
function satisﬁes the tise (5.2). We take the potential to be (Figure 5.11)
V =

V0
for |x| < a
0
otherwise,
(5.31)
where V0 is a constant. At |x| > a the relevant solutions of (5.2) are
e±ikx
or

sin(kx + φ)
at x > a
± sin(−kx + φ)
at x < −a

with
k =
r
2mE
¯h2 , (5.32a)
4 Gordon, J.P., Zeiger, H.J., & Townes, C.H., 1954, Phys. Rev, 95, 282 (1954)


5.3 Scattering of free particles
85
Figure 5.11 A square, classically forbidden barrier and the functional forms for stationary
states of even (top) and odd parity.
where φ is a constant phase. Since the time dependence of these stationary
states is obtained by introducing the factor e−iEt/¯h, a plus sign in e±ikx
implies that the particle is moving to the right, and a minus sign is associated
with movement to the left. A wavefunction that is proportional to sin(kx+φ)
contains both types of wave with amplitudes of equal magnitude, so it makes
motion in either direction equally likely. At |x| < a the relevant solutions of
(5.2) are
e±iKx
or

cos(Kx)
sin(Kx)

with
K =
s
2m(E −V0)
¯h2
when
E > V0
e±Kx
or

cosh(Kx)
sinh(Kx)

with
K =
s
2m(V0 −E)
¯h2
when
E < V0.
(5.32b)
In every case we have a choice between exponential solutions and solu-
tions of well-deﬁned parity. Since our physical problem is strongly asymmet-
ric in that particles are ﬁred in from negative x rather than equally from both
sides, it is tempting to work with the exponential solutions of the tise rather
than the solutions of well-deﬁned parity. However, the algebra involved in
solving our problem is much lighter if we use solutions of well-deﬁned parity
because then the conditions that ensure proper behaviour of the solution
at x = a automatically ensure that the solution also behaves properly at
x = −a; if we use exponential solutions, we have to deal with the cases
x = ±a individually. Therefore we seek solutions of the form
ψe(x) =

B sin(k|x| + φ)
for |x| > a
cos(Kx) or cosh(Kx)
otherwise;
ψo(x) =



B′ sin(kx + φ′)
for x > a
A sin(Kx) or A sinh(Kx)
for |x| ≤a,
−B′ sin(k|x| + φ′)
otherwise,
(5.33)
where A, B, B′, φ and φ′ are constants. B, φ and φ′ will be unambiguously
determined by the conditions at x = ±a. These conditions will make B′
proportional to A, which we treat as a free parameter.
In our study of the bound states of potential wells in §5.1, the require-
ment that the wavefunction vanish at inﬁnity could be satisﬁed only for
discrete values of E. These values of E (and therefore k and K) diﬀered
between the even- and odd-parity solutions, so all energy eigenfunctions au-
tomatically had well-deﬁned parity. In the case of a free particle, by contrast,
we will be able to construct both an even-parity and an odd-parity solution
for every given value of E. Linear combinations of these solutions ψe(x) and
ψo(x) of well-deﬁned parity are energy eigenfunctions that do not have well-
deﬁned parity. We now show that the sum these solutions of the tise with
well-deﬁned parity can be made to describe the actual scattering problem.
In the solution we seek, there are no particles approaching from the
right.
Adding the even- and odd-parity solutions, we obtain at x > a a
solution of the form
ψe(x) + ψo(x) = B sin(kx + φ) + B′ sin(kx + φ′)
= eikx
2i

Beiφ + B′eiφ′
−e−ikx
2i

Be−iφ + B′e−iφ′
.
(5.34)


86
Chapter 5: Motion in step potentials
The condition that no particles are approaching from the right is
B′ = −Bei(φ′−φ),
(5.35)
for then at x > a the solution becomes
ψe(x) + ψo(x) = eikx
2i Beiφ(1 −e2i(φ′−φ))
(x > a),
(5.36)
which includes only particles moving to the right. At x < −a the solution is
now
ψe(x) + φo(x) = B sin(−kx + φ) −B′ sin(−kx + φ′)
= eikx
2i

−Be−iφ + B′e−iφ′
+ e−ikx
2i

Beiφ −B′eiφ′
= eikxiBe−iφ + e−ikx
2i
Beiφ 
1 + e2i(φ′−φ)
.
(5.37a)
In the solution given by equations (5.36) and (5.37a) the incoming amplitude
is iBe−iφ, while the amplitudes for reﬂection and transmission are
B
2ieiφ  1 + e2i∆φ
(reﬂected)
B
2ieiφ  1 −e2i∆φ
(transmitted),
(5.37b)
where
∆φ ≡φ′ −φ
(5.37c)
is phase diﬀerence ∆φ between the odd- and even-parity solutions at |x| >
a. From the ratios of the mod-squares of the outgoing amplitudes to that
of the incoming amplitude iB we have that the reﬂection and transmission
probabilities are
Preﬂ= cos2(∆φ)
Ptrans = sin2(∆φ).
(5.38)
Thus ∆φ determines the reﬂection and transmission probabilities. Notice
that these formulae for the transmission and reﬂection probabilities have
been obtained without reference to the form of the wavefunction at |x| < a.
Consequently, they are valid for any scattering potential V (x) that has even
parity and vanishes outside some ﬁnite region, here |x| < a.
The scattering cross section
In the case that V0 < 0, so the scattering
potential forms a potential well, the outgoing wave at x > a represents
two physically distinct possibilities: (i) that the incoming particle failed to
interact with the potential well and continued on its way undisturbed, and
(ii) that it was for a while trapped by the well and later broke free towards
the right rather than the left.
We isolate the possibility of scattering by
writing the amplitude of the outgoing wave as 1 + T times the amplitude
of the incoming wave.
Here the one represents the possibility of passing
through undisturbed and T represents real forward scattering.
From our
formulae (5.37) for the amplitudes of the incoming and outgoing waves we
have that
T = 1
2

e2iφ′ −e2iφ
−1.
(5.39a)
If we similarly write the amplitude of the reﬂected wave as R times the
amplitude of the incoming wave, then from the formulae above we have
R = −1
2

e2iφ′ + e2iφ
.
(5.39b)


5.3 Scattering of free particles
87
The total scattering cross section5 is deﬁned to be the sum of the prob-
abilities for forward and backward scattering:
σ = |R|2 + |T |2.
(5.40)
Now |R|2 is just the reﬂection probability Preﬂ, and the transmission proba-
bility is
Ptrans = |1 + T |2 = 1 + |T |2 + T + T ∗,
(5.41)
so
σ = Preﬂ+ Ptrans −1 −T −T ∗= −(T + T ∗).
(5.42)
From equation (5.39a) we have an expression for the total scattering cross
section in terms of the phase angles
σ = 2 −cos(2φ′) + cos(2φ).
(5.43a)
The trigonometric identities 1 + cos 2φ = 2 cos2 φ and 1 −cos 2φ = 2 sin2 φ
enable us to re-express the cross section as
σ = 2
 sin2 φ′ + cos2 φ

.
(5.43b)
5.3.1 Tunnelling through a potential barrier
Now consider the case V0 > E in which classical physics predicts that all
particles are reﬂected. From equations (5.33), the conditions for both the
wavefunction and its derivative to be continuous at x = a are
cosh(Ka) = B sin(ka + φ)
K sinh(Ka) = Bk cos(ka + φ)

or

A sinh(Ka) = B′ sin(ka + φ′)
KA cosh(Ka) = B′k cos(ka + φ′),
(5.44a)
where
k =
r
2mE
¯h2
and
K =
s
2m(V0 −E)
¯h2
.
(5.44b)
Dividing the equations of each pair into one another to eliminate the con-
stants A, B and B′, we obtain
tan(ka + φ) = (k/K) coth(Ka)
or
tan(ka + φ′) = (k/K) tanh(Ka).
(5.45)
On account of the fact that for any x, tan(x+π) = tan x, the equations have
inﬁnitely many solutions for φ and φ′ that diﬀer by rπ, where r is an integer.
From equations (5.39) and (5.43a) we see that these solutions give identical
amplitudes for reﬂection and transmission and the same value of the total
scattering cross section σ. Hence we need consider only the unique values of
φ and φ′ that lie within ±π/2 of −ka.
Equations (5.38) show that the transmission and reﬂection probabilities
are determined by the phase diﬀerence ∆φ = φ′ −φ. From (5.45) we have
∆φ = arctan
 k
K tanh(Ka)

−arctan
 k
K coth(Ka)

.
(5.46)
Figure 5.12 shows the transmission probability sin2(∆φ) as a function of
the energy of the incident particle for (2mV0a2/¯h2)1/2 = 0.5, 1 and 1.5. We
see that for the most permiable of these barriers the transmission probability
reaches 50% when the energy is less than a third of the energy, V0, classically
required for passage. On the other hand, the transmission probability is still
5 This deﬁnition of the total scattering cross section only applies to one-dimensional
scattering problems. See §12.3 for the deﬁnition of the total scattering cross section that
is appropriate for realistic three-dimensional experiments.


88
Chapter 5: Motion in step potentials
Figure 5.12 The transmission probability for a particle incident on a potential-energy
barrier of height V0 and width 2a as a function of the particle’s energy. The curves are
labelled by the values of the dimensionless parameter (2mV0a2/¯h2)1/2.
only 80% when E = V0 and classically the particle would be certain to pass.
A barrier of the same height but three times as thick allows the particle to
pass with only 2% probability when E = V0/3, and even when E = V0 the
chance of passing this thicker barrier is only a third.
When the barrier is high, Ka ≫1 so both t ≡tanh(Ka) and coth(Ka) =
1/t are close to unity:
t ≡tanh(Ka) = eKa −e−Ka
eKa + e−Ka ≃(1 −e−2Ka)2.
(5.47)
Consequently, the arguments of the two arctan functions in equation (5.46)
are similar and we can obtain an approximate expression for ∆φ by writing
arctan
 k
K t

= arctan
 k
Kt + k
Kt(t2 −1)

≃arctan
 k
Kt

+
1
1 + (k/Kt)2
k
Kt(t2 −1),
(5.48)
where we have used the standard formula d arctan x/dx = 1/(1 + x2). Using
equations (5.47) and (5.48) in equation (5.46), and we have
∆φ ≃−
4e−2Ka
Kt/k + k/Kt ≃−4k
K e−2Ka
(Ka ≫1).
(5.49)
Thus the probability of passing the barrier, sin2(∆φ), decreases like e−4Ka
as the barrier gets higher.
5.3.2 Scattering by a classically allowed region
Now consider the case of scattering by the square potential (5.31) when
E > V0, so the region of non-zero potential is classically allowed. Physically
that region could be a classically surmountable barrier (V0 > 0) or a potential
well (V0 < 0). At |x| < a the wavefunctions of well-deﬁned parity are now
either cos(Kx) or A sin(Ka) and from equation (5.33) the conditions for
continuity of the wavefunction and its derivative at x = a are
cos(Ka) = B sin(ka + φ)
−K sin(Ka) = Bk cos(ka + φ)

or

A sin(Ka) = B′ sin(ka + φ′)
KA cos(Ka) = B′k cos(ka + φ′),
(5.50a)


5.3 Scattering of free particles
89
Figure 5.13 The probability of reﬂection by three potential barriers of height V0 and
three half-widths a as functions of E/V0. The curves are labelled by the dimensionless
parameter (2mV0a2/¯h2)1/2.
where
k =
r
2mE
¯h2
and
K =
s
2m(E −V0)
¯h2
.
(5.50b)
By dividing the second equation of each pair into the ﬁrst we obtain equations
that uniquely determine the two solutions:
tan(ka+φ) = −(k/K) cot(Ka)
or
tan(ka+φ′) = (k/K) tan(Ka). (5.51)
The points in Figure 5.13 at E > V0 were obtained by solving these equations6
for φ and φ′ and then calculating the reﬂection probability cos2(φ′−φ), while
the remaining points were obtained from equations (5.46) for E < V0. We
see that for all three barrier widths the reﬂection probability obtained for
E > V0 joins smoothly onto that for E < V0. The reﬂection probability
tends to zero with increasing E/V0 as we would expect, but its dependence
on the thickness of the barrier is surprising: for E/V0 = 2 the thickest
barrier has the lowest reﬂection probability. In fact, the reﬂection probability
vanishes for E slightly larger than 2V0 and then increases at larger energies.
Similarly, the probability for transmission through the next thickest barrier
vanishes near E = 3.5V0.
The cause of this unexpected phenomenon is
quantum interference between the amplitudes to be reﬂected from the front
and back edges of the barrier, which cancel each other when the barrier is of
a particular thickness.
When the constant V0 in the potential (5.31) is negative, there is a po-
tential well around the origin rather than a barrier. In the classical regime
the probability of reﬂection is zero, but as Figure 5.14 shows, it is in general
non-zero and is large near E/|V0| ≪1. The oscillations in the reﬂection prob-
ability apparent in Figure 5.14 are caused by quantum interference between
reﬂections from the two edges of the well.
5.3.3 Resonant scattering
In the limit that a barrier becomes very high, the probability that it reﬂects
an incoming particle tends to unity. Consequently, a particle that encounters
two high barriers (Figure 5.15) can bounce from one barrier to the other a
great many times before eventually tunnelling through one of the barriers and
6 An explicit expression (5.78) for the reﬂection probability in terms of ka and Ka and
without reference to φ or φ′ can be derived (Problem 5.10). This formula is useful when
limiting cases need to be examined.


90
Chapter 5: Motion in step potentials
Figure 5.14 The probability for reﬂection by square potential wells of depth |V0|. The
full curve is for (2m|V |a2/¯h2)1/2 = 3 and the dashed curve is for a well only half as wide.
Figure 5.15 Schematic of the potential-energy function V (x) experienced by an α-particle
near an atomic nucleus.
The short-range ‘strong’ force causes the particle’s potential
energy to rise extremely steeply at the edge of the nucleus. The long-range electrostatic
repulsion between the nucleus and the alpha particle causes V (x) to drop steadily as the
α-particle moves away from the nucleus.
Figure 5.16 A pair of δ-function potentials form a well within which a particle can be
trapped. The forms taken by the wavefunctions of the stationary states of even (top) and
odd parity are shown.
escaping to inﬁnity. This situation arises in atomic nuclei because the short-
range ‘strong’ force conﬁnes charged particles such as protons and helium
nuclei (α-particles) within the nucleus even though it would be energetically
advantageous for them to escape to inﬁnity: the electrostatic energy released
as the positively charged particle recedes from the positively charged nucleus
can more than compensate for the work done on the strong force in moving
beyond its short eﬀective range (Figure 5.15). Some types of radioactivity –
the sudden release of a charged particle by a nucleus – are caused by these
particles tunnelling out of a well that has conﬁned them for up to several
gigayears. We now use a toy model of this physics to demonstrate that there
is an important link between the cross section for scattering by a well and the
existence of long-lived bound states within the well. This connection makes
it possible to probe the internal structure of atomic nuclei and ‘elementary’
particles with scattering experiments.
We model the barriers that form the potential well by δ-function poten-
tials, located at x = ±a:
V (x) = Vδ {δ(x + a) + δ(x −a)}
with
Vδ > 0.
(5.52)


5.3 Scattering of free particles
91
Figure 5.17 The total scattering cross sections of double δ-function barriers as a function
of the wavenumber of the incoming particle. The barriers are located at x = ±a. The full
curve is for high barriers (2mVδa/¯h2 = 40) while the dotted curve is for lower barriers
(2mVδa/¯h2 = 10).
By integrating the tise
−¯h2
2m
d2ψ
dx2 + Vδδ(x)ψ = Eψ
(5.53)
for an inﬁnitesimal distance across the location of the δ-function barriers
in equation (5.52), we ﬁnd that a barrier introduces a discontinuity in the
gradient of the wavefunction of magnitude (cf. eq. 5.13)
dψ
dx

= Kψ,
where
K ≡2mVδ
¯h2
.
(5.54)
Hence the energy eigenstates that will enable us to calculate scattering by a
double-δ-function system take the form of sinusoids at |x| < a and at |x| > a
that join continuously at x = ±a in such a way that their gradients there
diﬀer in accordance with equation (5.54) (Figure 5.16).
At x = a the requirements on the even-parity solution ψe(x) that it be
continuous and have the prescribed change in derivative, read
B sin(ka + φ) = cos(ka)
kB cos(ka + φ) = −k sin(ka) + K cos(ka).
(5.55a)
Similarly the conditions on the odd-parity solution ψo(x) are
B′ sin(ka + φ′) = A sin(ka)
kB′ cos(ka + φ′) = kA cos(ka) + KA sin(ka).
(5.55b)
Dividing one equation in each pair by the other to eliminate A, B and B′ we
obtain
cot(ka + φ) = K/k −tan(ka)
cot(ka + φ′) = K/k + cot(ka).
(5.56)
From these expressions and equations (5.38) we can easily recover the prob-
ability sin2(φ′ −φ) that an incoming particle gets past both δ-function bar-
riers. More interesting is the total scattering cross section, which is related
to the phases by equation (5.43b). Figure 5.17 shows as a function of the
wavenumber of the incoming particle the cross sections for barriers of two
heights. The height of a barrier is best quantiﬁed by the dimensionless num-
ber 2mVδa/¯h2 = Ka.
The full curve in Figure 5.17 is for the case that


92
Chapter 5: Motion in step potentials
Ka = 40 and the dotted curve is for the case of a lower barrier such that
Ka = 10. In each case the cross section shows a series of peaks. In the case
of the higher barrier, these peaks lie near ka = nπ/2, with n = 1, 2, . . .. In
the case of the lower barrier the peaks are less sharp and occur at slightly
smaller values of ka.
If the barriers were so high as to be impenetrable, the particle would have
bound states with ka = nπ/2, which is the condition for the wavefunction to
vanish at x = ±a. Each peak in the scattering cross section is associated with
one of these bound states. Physically, the scattering cross section is large
near the energy of a bound state because at such an energy the particle can
become temporarily trapped between the barriers, and after a delay escape
either to the right or the left.
When the barriers have only ﬁnite height, the state |trap⟩in which
the particle is initially trapped in the well is not a stationary state, and
its expansion in stationary states will involve states whose energies span a
non-zero range, say (E0 −Γ/2, E0 + Γ/2). For simplicity we assume that
|trap⟩has even parity, so it can be expressed as a linear combination of the
even-parity stationary states |e; E⟩:
|trap⟩=
Z E0+Γ/2
E0−Γ/2
dE a(E)|e; E⟩,
(5.57)
where a(E) is the amplitude to measure energy E.
Outside the well the
wavefunction of this state is
ψtrap(x) ∝
Z E0+Γ/2
E0−Γ/2
dE a(E) sin(kx + φ)
(x > a).
(5.58)
Below we shall ﬁnd that when the well is very deep, φ becomes a sensitive
function of E in the neighbourhood of particular ‘resonant’ energies. Then
the sines in equation (5.58) cancel essentially perfectly on account of the
rapidly changing phase φ(E). When the integral is small, there is negligible
probability of ﬁnding the particle outside the well.
The evolution of ψtrap with time is obtained by adding the usual factors
e−iEt/¯h in the integral of equation (5.58):
ψtrap(x, t) ∝
Z E0+Γ/2
E0−Γ/2
dE a(E) sin(kx + φ) e−iEt/¯h
(x > a).
(5.59)
After a time of order h/Γ the relative phases of the integrand at E0−Γ/2 and
E0 + Γ/2 will have changed by π and the originally perfect cancellation of
the sines will have been sabotaged. The growth of the value of the integral,
and therefore the wavefunction outside the well, signals increasing probability
that the particle has escaped from the well. The more rapidly φ changes with
E, the smaller is the value of Γ at which a negligible value of the integral in
equation (5.58) can be achieved, and the smaller Γ is, the longer the particle
is trapped. Thus sensitive dependence of the phases on energy is associated
with long-lived trapped states, which are in turn associated with abnormally
large scattering cross sections.
Notice that in Figure 5.17 the peaks are
narrower at small values of k because the smaller the particle’s energy is, the
smaller is its probability of tunnelling through one of the barriers.
The Breit–Wigner cross section
We have seen that when particles are
scattered by a model potential that contains a well, the total scattering cross
section has narrow peaks. The physical arguments given above suggest that
this behaviour is generic in the sense that it is related to the time it takes
a particle to tunnel out of the well after being placed there. What we have
yet to do is to understand mathematically how the fairly simple formulae
(5.43b) and (5.56) generate sharp peaks in the energy dependence of σ. An


5.3 Scattering of free particles
93
Figure 5.18 The values of the phases φ (full curve) and φ′ (dashed curve) from equations
(5.56) as functions of the wavenumber of the incoming particle when the latter is scattered
by the double δ-function well (eq. 5.52). These results are for the case 2mVδa/¯h2 = 40.
understanding of this phenomenon will motivate a simple analytic model of
resonant scattering that is widely used in experimental physics.
Figure 5.18 shows the values of the phases φ and φ′ that solve equation
(5.56). For most values of k (and therefore E), the two angles are equal, so
the sum sin2 φ′ + cos2 φ in equation (5.43b) is unity. The peaks in σ occur
where φ and φ′ brieﬂy diverge from one another at the integral-sign features
in Figure 5.18, which we shall refer to as ‘glitches’.
We are interested in the case K/k ≫1. Then for most values of ka
the right sides of equations (5.56) are dominated by the ﬁrst term, so the
cotangent on the left is equal to some large positive value, and its argument
lies close to zero. However each time ka/π approaches (2r + 1)π/2 with r
an integer, the tangent in the ﬁrst equation brieﬂy overwhelms K/k and the
right side changes from a large positive number to a large negative number.
Consequently the argument of the cotangent on the left quickly increases to
a value close to π. As ka increases through (2r + 1)π/2, the tangent instan-
taneously changes sign, and the argument of the cotangent instantaneously
returns to a small value. Examination of the third glitch in Figure 5.18 con-
ﬁrms that φ rises rapidly but continuously by almost π and then suddenly
drops by exactly π as this analysis implies. The abrupt rise in φ is centred
on the point at which ka + φ = π/2, at which point φ ≃−rπ because at a
glitch ka ≃(2r + 1)π/2. Consequently, glitches in φ are centred on points
at which cos2(φ) = 1. Meanwhile φ′ ≃−(2r + 1)π/2, so sin2(φ′) = 1 and
equation (5.43b) gives σ = 4. A very similar analysis reveals how the second
of equations (5.56) generates glitches in φ′.
Putting this argument on a quantitative basis, we Taylor expand tan(ka)
around the resonant value of k, kR, at which tan(kRa) = K/kR. Then
K/k −tan(ka) ≃−sec2(kRa)aδk = −(1 + K2/k2
R)aδk,
(5.60)
where δk = k −kR. We also observe that glitches in φ occur where ka ≃
(2r + 1)π/2, so
cot(ka + φ) = cos(ka) cos(φ) −sin(ka) sin φ
sin(ka) cos φ + cos(ka) sin(φ) ≃−tan φ.
(5.61)
With these approximations the ﬁrst of equations (5.56) reads
tan φ ≃
 1 + K2/k2
R

aδk.


94
Chapter 5: Motion in step potentials
Figure 5.19 The total cross section for the scattering of neutrons by 238U nuclei. (From
data published in L.M. Bollinger, et al., Phys. Rev., 105, 661 (1957))
Equation (5.43b) now gives the cross section as
σ = 2
 sin2 φ′ + cos2 φ

= 2

sin2 φ′ +
1
1 + tan2 φ

≃2

sin2 φ′ +
1
1 + (1 + K2/k2
R)2a2(δk)2

.
(5.62)
Thus in the vicinity of the resonant energy ER = ¯h2k2
R/2m, where
δk =
m
¯h2kR
(E −ER),
(5.63)
the cross section has the form
σ = constant +
2(Γ/2)2
(Γ/2)2 + (E −ER)2 ,
(5.64a)
where
Γ ≡
2¯h2kR
(1 + K2/k2
R)am ≃2¯h2k3
R
K2am.
(5.64b)
Γ has the dimensions of energy and is the characteristic width of the reso-
nance. Experimental data for the energy dependence of cross sections are
often ﬁtted to the functional form deﬁned by equation (5.64a), which is
known as the Breit–Wigner cross section. Figure 5.19 shows a typical
example.
The dependence on energy of the phase φ and the total scattering cross
section σ in the vicinity of a peak in σ is reminiscent of the behaviour near
a resonance of a lightly damped harmonic oscillator (Box 5.1).
By the uncertainty principle, the width Γ of the Breit–Wigner cross
section (5.64a) corresponds to a time scale
tR = ¯h
Γ = K2am
2¯hk3
R
.
(5.65)
A naive calculation conﬁrms that tR is the timescale on which a particle
escapes from the well. When a particle encounters a δ-function barrier, it is
easy to show (Problem 5.11) that its probability of tunnelling through the
barrier is
Ptun =
4
4 + (K/kR)2 ≃4(kR/K)2
for
K ≫kR.
(5.66)


5.4 How applicable are our results?
95
Box 5.1: Analogy with a damped oscillator
When a weakly damped harmonic oscillator is driven at some angular
frequency ω, the phase of the steady-state response changes sharply in
the vicinity of the oscillator’s resonant frequency ωR. Speciﬁcally, if the
oscillator’s equation of motion is
¨x + γ ˙x + ω2
Rz = F cos(ωt),
then the steady-state solution is x = X cos(ωt −φ), where
X =
F
p
(ω2
R −ω2)2 + γ2ω2
and
φ = arctan

γω
ω2
R −ω2

.
As the driving frequency approaches the resonant frequency from below,
the phase lag φ increases from near zero to π/2. As the driving frequency
passes through resonance, φ drops discontinuously to −π/2, and then in-
creases to near zero as ω2 −ω2
R becomes large compared to ωγ. These
results suggest a picture in which a quantum well is an oscillator that
is being driven by the incoming probability amplitude. The oscillator’s
level of damping is set by the well’s characteristic energy Γ of equa-
tion (5.64b), and the form of the Breit–Wigner cross section of equation
(5.64a) mirrors the Lorentzian form of the oscillator’s amplitude X.
Hence the probability of remaining in the well after bouncing n times oﬀthe
walls is
Ptrap = (1 −Ptun)n.
(5.67)
The particle moves from one barrier to the other in a time tf = 2am/¯hkR
and in this time the logarithm of Ptrap changes by ln(1 −Ptun) ≃−Ptun, so
d
dt ln(Ptrap) ≃−Ptun
tf
= −1
tR
,
(5.68)
where tR is given by equation (5.65). Thus this simple physical argument
conﬁrms that ¯h/Γ is the characteristic time for the particle to remain in the
well.
5.4 How applicable are our results?
It seems unlikely that any real system has a discontinuous potential V (x), so
our results are of practical interest only if suﬃciently steep changes in V can
be treated as discontinuous. We now investigate how abrupt a change in po-
tential must be for results obtained under the assumption of a discontinuous
potential to be applicable.
When the wavefunction is evanescent (i.e. ∝e±Kx) on one side of the
discontinuity, our results carry over to potentials that change continuously:
where E < V (x), the wavefunction is no longer a simple exponential but
its phase remains constant and its amplitude decreases monotonically, while
in the region E > V (x) the sinusoidal dependence ψ(x) ∝eikx is replaced
by some other oscillatory function of similar amplitude. Qualitatively the
results we have obtained for particles conﬁned by a step potential carry over
to continuously varying potentials when E < V on one side of a region of
varying potential.
The situation is less clear when E > V (x) on both sides of the change
in the potential. The relevance to such cases of our solutions for step po-
tentials can be investigated by solving the tise numerically for a potential


96
Chapter 5: Motion in step potentials
Figure 5.20 The full curve shows the probability of reﬂection when a particle moves from
x = −∞in the potential (5.69) with energy E = ¯h2k2/2m and V0 = 0.7E. The dotted
line is the value obtained for a step change in the potential (Problem 5.4).
Figure 5.21 Each curve shows the reﬂection probability when a particle with kinetic
energy E encounters a region in which the potential V (x) smoothly changes to V0 over
a distance 2b, and then smoothly returns to zero; the change in V is given by equation
(5.69) with x replaced by x + a, and the fall is given by the same equation with x replaced
by −(x −a). The full curves are for ka = 30 and the dashed curves for ka = 15. The
left panel is for barriers of height V0 = 0.7E, while the right panel is for potential wells
(V0 = −0.7E).
that changes over a distance that can be varied (Problem 5.15). Consider
for example
V (x) = V0
( 0
for x < −b
1
2[1 + sin(πx/2b)]
for |x| < b
1
for x > b,
(5.69)
which changes from 0 to V0 over a distance 2b centred on the origin. Fig-
ure 5.20 shows the probability of reﬂection when a particle with energy
¯h2k2/2m = V0/0.7 encounters this rise in potential energy as it approaches
from x = −∞. For kb ≪1, the probability of reﬂection is close to that ob-
tained for the corresponding step potential (Problem 5.4), but it falls to very
much smaller values for kb ∼> 2.7 Thus treating a rapid change in potential
energy as a discontinuity can lead to a serious over-estimate of the reﬂected
amplitude.
Figure 5.21 shows reﬂection probabilities for particles of energy E that
encounter a ﬁnite region of elevated or depressed potential energy as a func-
tion of the sharpness of the region’s sides – the changes in potential energy
occur in a distance 2b as described by equation (5.69). The left panel is for
potential barriers of height 0.7E and the right panel is for potential wells of
7 The ‘wkbj’ approximation derived in §11.6 provides an analytic approximation to
the solution of the tise when kb is signiﬁcantly larger than 2π.


5.4 How applicable are our results?
97
depth 0.7E. The full curves are for the case in which the region’s half-width
a satisﬁes ka = 30, where k is the wavenumber of the incoming and outgoing
wavefunctions, while the dashed curves are for regions only half as wide. The
left panel shows that when kb = 1, the reﬂection probability generated by a
smooth barrier is smaller than that for a sharp step by a factor ∼1.7, and
when kb = 2 it is nearly a factor ten smaller than in the case of an abrupt
barrier. The right panel shows that in the case of a potential well, even
smaller values of kb are required for the assumption of an abrupt change in
V (x) to be useful. Thus these results conﬁrm the implication of Figure 5.20
that modelling a change in potential energy by a sharp step is seriously mis-
leading unless the half width of the transition region b satisﬁes the condition
kb < 1.
The amplitude to be reﬂected by a region of varying potential energy
decreases rapidly with increasing half width b of the transition region, but
the amplitudes to be reﬂected at the leading and trailing edges of a region
of varying potential remain comparable. Consequently, destructive interfer-
ence between these amplitudes is possible for all values of b. Moreover, the
phases of the reﬂected amplitudes depend on b, so the plots of overall reﬂec-
tion probability versus b in Figure 5.21 show there are regular nulls in the
probability for reﬂection like those we see in Figure 5.14 for the probability
for reﬂection by an abrupt potential well.
We conclude that many qualitative features of results obtained with step
potentials also hold for continuous potentials, but results obtained for step
potentials with no classically forbidden region are quantitatively misleading
when applied to continuous potentials unless the distance over which the
potential changes is small compared to the de Broglie wavelength λ = h/p
of the incident particles.
Let’s consider under what circumstances this condition could be satisﬁed
for a stream of electrons. The de Broglie wavelength of electrons with kinetic
energy E is
λ = 1.16
 E
1 eV
−1/2
nm.
(5.70)
For the one-dimensional approximation to apply, we need the beam to be
many λ wide, and for the step approximation to be valid, we require the
change in potential to be complete well inside λ. In practice these conditions
can be simultaneously satisﬁed only when the potential change is associated
with a change in the medium through which the electrons are propagating.
If the medium is made of atoms, the change must extend over at least the
characteristic size of atoms 0.1 nm. Hence we require E ∼< 1 eV.
Realistically step potentials are relevant only for less massive particles,
photons and neutrinos. The propensity for some photons to be transmit-
ted and some reﬂected at an abrupt change in potential, such as that at a
glass/air interface, plays an important role in optics. By contrast, electrons,
neutrons and protons are unlikely to be partially transmitted and partially
reﬂected by a region of varying potential.
These considerations explain why the phenomenon of partial reﬂection
and partial transmission is unknown to classical mechanics, which is con-
cerned with massive bodies that have de Broglie wavelengths many orders of
magnitude smaller than an atom at any experimentally accessible energy.


98
Chapter 5: Motion in step potentials
5.5 Summary
In this chapter we have examined some highly idealised systems and reached
some surprising conclusions.
• Any one-dimensional potential well has at least one bound state, and
may have more depending on the size of the value of the dimensionless
parameter W deﬁned by equation (5.8), with V0 and a interpreted as
the well’s characteristic depth and width, respectively.
• A particle trapped by a very narrow or shallow well has negligible prob-
ability of being found in the well.
• When solving the tise in the presence of an inﬁnite step in the potential,
we should require the wavefunction to vanish at the base of the step.
• When two identical square potential wells are separated by a barrier,
the eigenenergies occur in pairs, and the associated wavefunctions have
either even or odd parity with respect to an origin that is symmetrically
placed between the wells. The even-parity state of a pair lies slightly
lower in energy than the odd-parity state.
A sum of the lowest two
eigenstates is a state in which the particle is certainly in one well, while
the diﬀerence gives a state in which the particle is certainly in the other
well. A particle that starts in one well oscillates between the wells with a
period inversely proportional to the diﬀerence between the eigenenergies.
The particle is said to ‘tunnel’ through the barrier that divides the two
wells at a rate that decreases exponentially with the product of the
barrier’s height and the square of its width.
• In an ammonia molecule the nitrogen atom moves in an eﬀective poten-
tial that provides two identical wells and the above model explains how
an ammonia maser works.
• A free particle has a non-zero probability to cross a potential barrier
that would be impenetrable according to classical physics. On the other
hand, if the potential changes signiﬁcantly within one de Broglie wave-
length, a particle generally has a non-zero probability of being reﬂected
by a low barrier that classical physics predicts will be crossed.
• The probabilities for a free particle to be reﬂected or transmitted by a
potential barrier or a well with very steep sides oscillate as functions of
the particle’s energy on account of quantum interference between the
amplitudes to be reﬂected at the front and back edges of the barrier or
well.
• When a free particle is scattered by a region that contains a potential
well, the total scattering cross section peaks in the vicinity of the energies
of the well’s approximately bound states. Longer-lived bound states are
associated with sharper peaks in a plot of scattering cross section versus
energy because the width in energy of a peak, Γ, and the lifetime t0 of
the corresponding bound state are related by the uncertainty relation
t0Γ ∼¯h.
• The Breit–Wigner formula (5.64a) gives the energy-dependence of a scat-
tering cross-section near a resonance, and the timescale ¯h/Γ that appears
in it is the typical time for which a particle is trapped.
• The results we have obtained for discontinuous potentials V (x) are an
accurate guide to what will happen when the potential changes contin-
uously when either (i) the particle is classically forbidden on one side
of the change, or (ii) the change is complete within a fraction of a de
Broglie wavelength. When the potential changes more gradually, the
amplitude to be reﬂected by the region of changing potential is typically
much smaller than in our idealised examples, but, as in these examples,
the amplitude to be reﬂected oscillates as a function of energy.


Problems
99
Problems
5.1
A particle is conﬁned by the potential well
V (x) =
n 0
for |x| < a
∞
otherwise.
(5.71)
Explain (a) why we can assume that there is a complete set of stationary
states with well-deﬁned parity and (b) why to ﬁnd the stationary states we
solve the tise subject to the boundary condition ψ(±a) = 0.
Determine the particle’s energy spectrum and give the wavefunctions of
the ﬁrst two stationary states.
5.2
At t = 0 the particle of Problem 5.1 has the wavefunction
ψ(x) =

1/
√
2a
for |x| < a
0
otherwise.
(5.72)
Find the probabilities that a measurement of its energy will yield:
(a)
9¯h2π2/(8ma2); (b) 16¯h2π2/(8ma2).
5.3
Find the probability distribution of measuring momentum p for the
particle described in Problem 5.2. Sketch and comment on your distribution.
Hint: express ⟨p|x⟩in the position representation.
5.4
Particles move in the potential
V (x) =

0
for x < 0
V0
for x > 0.
(5.73)
Particles of mass m and energy E > V0 are incident from x = −∞. Show
that the probability that a particle is reﬂected is
k −K
k + K
2
,
(5.74)
where k ≡
√
2mE/¯h and K ≡
p
2m(E −V0)/¯h. Show directly from the
tise that the probability of transmission is
4kK
(k + K)2
(5.75)
and check that the ﬂux of particles moving away from the origin is equal to
the incident particle ﬂux.
5.5
Show that the energies of bound, odd-parity stationary states of the
square potential well
V (x) =

0
for |x| < a
V0 > 0
otherwise,
(5.76)
are governed by
cot(ka) = −
s
W 2
(ka)2 −1
where
W ≡
r
2mV0a2
¯h2
and
k2 = 2mE/¯h2.
(5.77)
Show that for a bound odd-parity state to exist, we require W > π/2.


100
Problems
Figure 5.22 The real part of the wavefunction when a free particle of energy E is scattered
by a classically forbidden square barrier barrier (top) and a potential well (bottom). The
upper panel is for a barrier of height V0 = E/0.7 and half width a such that 2mEa2/¯h2 = 1.
The lower panel is for a well of depth V0 = E/0.2 and half width a such that 2mEa2/¯h2 =
9. In both panels (2mE/¯h2)1/2 = 40.
Figure 5.23 A triangle for Prob-
lem 5.10
5.6
Show that the correctly normalised wavefunction of a particle trapped
by the potential V (x) = −Vδδ(x) is ψ(x) =
√
Ke−K|x|, where K = mVδ/¯h2.
Show that although this wavefunction makes it certain that a measurement
of x will ﬁnd the particle outside the well where its kinetic energy is nega-
tive, the expectation value of its kinetic energy ⟨EK⟩= 1
2mV 2
δ /¯h2 is in fact
positive. Reconcile this apparent paradox as follows: (i) show that for a
narrow, deep potential well of depth V0 and half-width a, with 2V0a = Vδ,
ka ≃W ≡(2mV0a2/¯h2)1/2, while Ka ≃W 2. (ii) Hence show that the con-
tribution from inside the well to ⟨EK⟩is |ψ(0)|2Vδ regardless of the value of
a. Explain physically what is happening as we send a →0.
5.7
Reproduce the plots shown in Figure 5.22 of the wavefunctions of par-
ticles that are scattered by a square barrier and a square potential well. Give
physical interpretations of as many features of the plots as you can.
5.8
Give an example of a potential in which there is a complete set of
bound stationary states of well-deﬁned parity, and an alternative complete
set of bound stationary states that are not eigenkets of the parity operator.
Hint: modify the potential discussed apropos NH3.
5.9
A free particle of energy E approaches a square, one-dimensional po-
tential well of depth V0 and width 2a. Show that the probability of being
reﬂected by the well vanishes when Ka = nπ/2, where n is an integer and
K = (2m(E + V0)/¯h2)1/2. Explain this phenomenon in physical terms.
5.10
Show that the phase shifts φ (for the even-parity stationary state)
and φ′ (for the odd-parity state) that are associated with scattering by a
classically allowed region of potential V0 and width 2a, satisfy
tan(ka + φ) = −(k/K) cot(Ka)
and
tan(ka + φ′) = (k/K) tan(Ka),


Problems
101
where k and K are, respectively, the wavenumbers at inﬁnity and in the
scattering potential. Show that
Preﬂ= cos2(φ′ −φ) =
(K/k −k/K)2 sin2(2Ka)
(K/k + k/K)2 sin2(2Ka) + 4 cos2(2Ka).
(5.78)
Hint: apply the cosine rule for an angle in a triangle in terms of the lengths
of the triangle’s sides to the top triangle in Figure 5.23.
5.11
A particle of energy E approaches from x < 0 a barrier in which the
potential energy is V (x) = Vδδ(x). Show that the probability of its passing
the barrier is
Ptun =
1
1 + (K/2k)2
where
k =
r
2mE
¯h2 ,
K = 2mVδ
¯h2
.
(5.79)
5.12
An electron moves along an inﬁnite chain of potential wells.
For
suﬃciently low energies we can assume that the set {|n⟩} is complete, where
|n⟩is the state of deﬁnitely being in the nth well.
By analogy with our
analysis of the NH3 molecule we assume that for all n the only non-vanishing
matrix elements of the Hamiltonian are E ≡⟨n|H|n⟩and A ≡⟨n ± 1|H|n⟩.
Give physical interpretations of the numbers A and E.
Explain why we can write
H =
∞
X
n=−∞
E|n⟩⟨n| + A (|n⟩⟨n + 1| + |n + 1⟩⟨n|) .
(5.80)
Writing an energy eigenket |E⟩= P
n an|n⟩show that
am(E −E) −A (am+1 + am−1) = 0.
(5.81)
Obtain solutions of these equations in which am ∝eikm and thus ﬁnd the
corresponding energies Ek. Why is there an upper limit on the values of k
that need be considered?
Initially the electron is in the state
|ψ⟩=
1
√2 (|Ek⟩+ |Ek+∆⟩) ,
(5.82)
where 0 < k ≪1 and 0 < ∆≪k. Describe the electron’s subsequent motion
in as much detail as you can.
5.13∗
In this problem you investigate the interaction of ammonia molecules
with electromagnetic waves in an ammonia maser. Let |+⟩be the state in
which the N atom lies above the plane of the H atoms and |−⟩be the state in
which the N lies below the plane. Then when there is an oscillating electric
ﬁeld E cos ωt directed perpendicular to the plane of the hydrogen atoms, the
Hamiltonian in the |±⟩basis becomes
H =

E + qEs cos ωt
−A
−A
E −qEs cos ωt

.
(5.83)
Transform this Hamiltonian from the |±⟩basis to the basis provided by the
states of well-deﬁned parity |e⟩and |o⟩(where |e⟩= (|+⟩+ |−⟩)/√2, etc).
Writing
|ψ⟩= ae(t)e−iEet/¯h|e⟩+ ao(t)e−iEot/¯h|o⟩,
(5.84)
show that the equations of motion of the expansion coeﬃcients are
dae
dt = −iΩao(t)

ei(ω−ω0)t + e−i(ω+ω0)t
dao
dt = −iΩae(t)

ei(ω+ω0)t + e−i(ω−ω0)t
,
(5.85)


102
Problems
where Ω≡qEs/2¯h and ω0 = (Eo −Ee)/¯h. Explain why in the case of a
maser the exponentials involving ω + ω0 a can be neglected so the equations
of motion become
dae
dt = −iΩao(t)ei(ω−ω0)t
;
dao
dt = −iΩae(t)e−i(ω−ω0)t.
(5.86)
Solve the equations by multiplying the ﬁrst equation by e−i(ω−ω0)t and diﬀer-
entiating the result. Explain how the solution describes the decay of a popu-
lation of molecules that are initially all in the higher energy level. Compare
your solution to the result of setting ω = ω0 in (5.86).
5.14
238U decays by α emission with a mean lifetime of 6.4 Gyr. Take the
nucleus to have a diameter ∼10−14 m and suppose that the α particle has
been bouncing around within it at speed ∼c/3. Modelling the potential
barrier that conﬁnes the α particle to be a square one of height V0 and width
2a, give an order-of-magnitude estimate of W = (2mV0a2/¯h2)1/2.
Given
that the energy released by the decay is ∼4 MeV and the atomic number
of uranium is Z = 92, estimate the width of the barrier through which the
α particle has to tunnel. Hence give a very rough estimate of the barrier’s
typical height.
Outline numerical work that would lead to an improved
estimate of the structure of the barrier.
5.15∗
Particles of mass m and momentum ¯hk at x < −a move in the
potential
V (x) = V0
( 0
for x < −a
1
2[1 + sin(πx/2a)]
for |x| < a
1
for x > a,
(5.87)
where V0 < ¯h2k2/2m.
Numerically reproduce the reﬂection probabilities
plotted Figure 5.20 as follows. Let ψi ≡ψ(xj) be the value of the wavefunc-
tion at xj = j∆, where ∆is a small increment in the x coordinate. From
the tise show that
ψj ≃(2 −∆2k2)ψj+1 −ψj+2,
(5.88)
where k ≡
p
2m(E −V )/¯h. Determine ψj at the two grid points with the
largest values of x from a suitable boundary condition, and use the recurrence
relation (5.88) to determine ψj at all other grid points. By matching the
values of ψ at the points with the smallest values of x to a sum of sinusoidal
waves, determine the probabilities required for the ﬁgure. Be sure to check
the accuracy of your code when V0 = 0, and in the general case explicitly
check that your results are consistent with equal ﬂuxes of particles towards
and away from the origin.
Equation (11.40) gives an analytical approximation for ψ in the case
that there is negligible reﬂection. Compute this approximate form of ψ and
compare it with your numerical results for larger values of a.
5.16∗
In this problem we obtain an analytic estimate of the energy diﬀer-
ence between the even- and odd-parity states of a double square well. Show
that for large θ, coth θ −tanh θ ≃4e−2θ. Next letting δk be the diﬀerence
between the k values that solve
tan [rπ −k(b −a)]
s
W 2
(ka)2 −1 =



coth
p
W 2 −(ka)2

even parity
tanh
p
W 2 −(ka)2

odd parity,
(5.89a)
where
W ≡
r
2mV0a2
¯h2
(5.89b)


Problems
103
for given r in the odd- and even-parity cases, deduce that
 " W 2
(ka)2 −1
1/2
+
 W 2
(ka)2 −1
−1/2#
(b −a) + 1
k

1 −(ka)2
W 2
−1 
δk
≃−4 exp
h
−2
p
W 2 −(ka)2
i
.
(5.90)
Hence show that when W ≫1 the fractional diﬀerence between the energies
of the ground and ﬁrst excited states is
δE
E ≃
−8a
W(b −a) e−2W√
1−E/V0.
(5.91)
5.17
We consider the scattering of free particles of mass m that move in
one-dimension in the potential V (x) = −Wδ(x), with W > 0. (a) For a well
of ﬁnite depth V0 and width 2a the condition on the phases φ and φ′ of the
even- and odd-parity wavefunctions ψ ∝sin(kx + φ), etc, for free particles
are
tan(ka + φ) = −k
K cot(Ka)
;
tan(ka + φ′) = −k
K tan(Ka)
Show that in the limit a →0, V0 = W/2a →∞we have tan φ →−¯h2k/mW
and φ′ →0. Hence obtain the scattering cross section by the δ-function
potential
σ =
2
1 + (¯hk/mW)2 .
(5.92)
(b) Re-derive the equation above for φ by requiring that ψ = sin(k|x| + φ)
satisfy the tise. Convince yourself that ψ = sin(kx) is also consistent with
the tise.
(a) The wavenumber k is constant as we send a →0 so ka →0.


6
Composite systems
Systems often consist of more than one part. For example a hydrogen atom
consists of a proton and an electron, and a diamond consists of a very large
number of carbon atoms. In these examples of composite systems there is
signiﬁcant physical interaction between the component parts of the system
– the electron moves in the electromagnetic ﬁeld of the proton, and electro-
magnetic forces act between the atoms in a diamond. But in principle there
need be no physical interaction between the parts of a composite system: it is
enough that we consider the sum of the parts to constitute a single system.
For example ‘quantum cryptography’ exploits correlations between widely
separated photons that are not interacting with each other, and in §7.5 we
shall study a system that consists of two completely unconnected gyros that
happen to be in the same box. Even in classical physics specifying the state
of such a system is a complex business because in general there will be cor-
relations between the parts of the system: the probability for obtaining a
certain value for an observable of one subsystem depends on the state of the
other subsystem. In quantum mechanics correlations arise through quantum
interference between various states of the system, with the result that cor-
relations are sometimes associated with unexpected and sometimes puzzling
phenomena.
In §6.1 we extend the formalism of quantum mechanics to composite
systems.
We introduce the concept of ‘quantum entanglement’, which is
how correlations between the diﬀerent parts of a composite system are rep-
resented in quantum mechanics, and we ﬁnd that subsystems have a propen-
sity to become entangled. In §6.1.4 we discuss a thought experiment with
entangled particles that Einstein believed demonstrated that quantum me-
chanics is merely an incomplete substitute for a deeper theory. Experiments
of this type have since been carried out and the results are inconsistent with
a theory of the type sought by Einstein. In §6.2 we introduce the principal
ideas of quantum computing, which is the focus of much current experimen-
tal work and has the potential to revolutionise computational mathematics
with major implications for the many aspects of our civilisation that rely
on cryptography. In §6.3 we introduce the operator that enables us to drop
unrealistic assumptions about our level of knowledge of the states of quan-
tum systems and introduce the key concept of entropy. In §6.4 we show that
thermodynamics arises naturally from quantum mechanics. In §6.5 we come
clean about the intellectual black hole that lurks at the heart of quantum
mechanics: the still unresolved problem of measurement.


6.1 Composite systems
105
At several points in the chapter we encounter fundamental questions
about quantum mechanics with which experimental and theoretical physi-
cists are currently wrestling. It is a remarkable feature of quantum mechanics
that already the sixth chapter of an introduction to the subject can bring
students to the frontier of human understanding.
6.1 Composite systems
Once we understand how to combine two systems A and B to make a com-
posite system AB, we will be in a position to build up systems of arbitrary
complexity, because we will be able to combine the system AB with some
other system C to make a system ABC, and so on indeﬁnitely. So we now
consider what is involved in forming AB out of A and B.
Suppose {|A; i⟩} and {|B; j⟩} are sets of states of A and B, respectively.
Then the symbolic product |A; i⟩|B; j⟩is used to denote that state of the
composite system in which A is in the state |A; i⟩and B is in the state |B; j⟩:
clearly this is a well deﬁned state of AB. We express this fact by writing
|AB; i, j⟩= |A; i⟩|B; j⟩,
(6.1a)
where the label of the ket before the semicolon indicates what system is
having its state speciﬁed, and the label after the semicolon enumerates the
states. The Hermitian adjoint of equation (6.1a) is
⟨AB; i, j| = ⟨A; i|⟨B; j|,
(6.1b)
and we deﬁne the product of a bra and a ket of AB by the rule
⟨AB; i′, j′|AB; i, j⟩= ⟨A; i′|A; i⟩⟨B; j′|B; j⟩.
(6.2)
This rule is well deﬁned because the right side is simply a product of two
complex numbers. It is a physically sensible rule because it implies that the
probability that AB is in the state i′j′ is the product of the probability that
A is in state i′ and B is in state j′:
p(AB; i′, j′) = |⟨AB; i′, j′|AB; i, j⟩|2 = |⟨A; i′|A; i⟩|2|⟨B; j′|B; j⟩|2
= p(A; i′)p(B; j′).
(6.3)
Any state of AB that like (6.2) can be written as a product of a state
of A and a state of B is rather special. To see this, we consider the simplest
non-trivial example, in which both A and B are two-state systems. Let |+⟩
and |−⟩be the two basis states |A; i⟩of A and let |↑⟩and |↓⟩be the two
basis states |B; j⟩of B – we shall call these the ‘up’ and ‘down’ states of B.
We use these basis states to expand the states of the subsystems:
|A⟩= a−|−⟩+ a+|+⟩
;
|B⟩= b↓|↓⟩+ b↑|↑⟩,
(6.4)
so the state |AB⟩= |A⟩|B⟩of AB can be written
|AB⟩= (a−|−⟩+ a+|+⟩) (b↓|↓⟩+ b↑|↑⟩, )
= a−b↓|−⟩|↓⟩+ a−b↑|−⟩|↑⟩+ a+b↓|+⟩|↓⟩+ a+b↑|+⟩|↑⟩.
(6.5)
The coeﬃcients in this expansion are the amplitudes for particular events
– for example a−b↓is the amplitude that A will be found to be minus and
B will be found to be down. From them we obtain a relation between the
probabilities of ﬁnding A to be in its plus state and B to be either up or
down:
p+↑
p+↓
= |b↑|2
|b↓|2 .
(6.6)


106
Chapter 6: Composite systems
Now by Bayes’ theorem, the probability of ﬁnding B to be up given that A
is plus is
p(B; ↑|A; +) =
p+↑
p(A; +) =
p+↑
p+↑+ p+↓
=
1
1 + p+↓/p+↑
.
(6.7)
With equation (6.6) this simpliﬁes to
p(B; ↑|A; +) =
1
1 + |b↓/b↑|2 .
(6.8)
The key thing is that the right side of this expression makes no reference to
subsystem A. Evidently, when the state |AB⟩of the composite system can
be written as a product |A⟩|B⟩of states of the subsystems, the probability
of ﬁnding B to be up is independent of the state of A. That is, the two
subsystems are uncorrelated or statistically independent. Usually the
states of subsystems are correlated and then the state of AB cannot be
expressed as a simple product |A⟩|B⟩.
For example, suppose we have two vertical gear wheels, A with NA
teeth and B with NB teeth. Then the state of A is speciﬁed by giving the
amplitudes ai that the ith tooth is on top of the wheel. The state of B is
similarly speciﬁed by the amplitudes bj for each of its teeth to be uppermost.
However, if both wheels are members of the same train of gears (as in a
clock), the probability that the jth tooth of B is on top will depend on which
tooth of A is uppermost. When the orientations of the wheels are correlated
in this way, each of the NANB conﬁgurations of the pair of wheels has an
independent probability, pij. Speciﬁcally, when NA = NB, pij will vanish
except when i = j. If these gear wheels are uncorrelated because they are
not meshed together, we need to specify only the NA+NB amplitudes ai and
bj. Once the wheels become correlated as a result of their teeth meshing, we
have to specify NANB amplitudes, one for each probability pij.
We now assume that the sets {|A; i⟩} and {|B; j⟩} are complete for their
respective systems and show that the set of states given by equation (6.1a)
for all possible values of i, j is then a complete set of states for the composite
system. That is, any state |AB; ψ⟩of AB can be written
|AB; ψ⟩=
X
ij
cij|AB; i, j⟩=
X
ij
cij|A; i⟩|B; j⟩.
(6.9)
The proof involves supposing on the contrary that there is a state |AB; φ⟩of
AB that cannot be expressed in the form (6.9). We construct the object
|AB; χ⟩≡|AB; φ⟩−
X
ij
cij|AB; i, j⟩where cij = ⟨AB; i, j|AB; φ⟩.
(6.10)
This object cannot vanish or |AB; φ⟩would be of the form (6.9). But when
AB is in this state, the amplitude for subsystem A to be in any of the states
|A; i⟩vanishes:
X
j
(⟨A; i|⟨B; j|) |AB; χ⟩= 0.
(6.11)
This conclusion is absurd because the set {|A; i⟩} is by hypothesis complete,
so the hypothesised state |AB; φ⟩cannot exist. Thus we have shown that a
general state of AB is speciﬁed by NANB amplitudes, just as the argument
about gear wheels suggested.
This result implies that the number of amplitudes required to specify the
state of a composite system grows exceedingly rapidly with the complexity
of the subsystems – for example, if NA = NB = 1000, a million amplitudes
are required to specify a general state of AB. By contrast only 2000 am-
plitudes are required to specify a product state |AB⟩= |A⟩|B⟩because the


6.1 Composite systems
107
form of such a state automatically sets to zero all correlations between the
subsystems. For a general state a large number of amplitudes are required
to specify these correlations.
Even when a state of AB is given by an expansion of the form (6.9) that
involves NANB amplitudes, the states of A and B may not be correlated. To
see this let |A; ψ⟩= PNA
i=1 ai|A; i⟩be the state of the subsystem A and let
|B; φ⟩= PNB
j=1 bj|B; j⟩be the state of subsystem B. Then the state of the
composite system AB is
|AB; χ⟩≡|A; ψ⟩|B; φ⟩=
X
ij
aibj|A; i⟩|B; j⟩.
(6.12)
The right side of this equation is identical to the right side of equation (6.9)
except that cij has been replaced with aibj.
Thus equation (6.12) is an
instance of the general expansion (6.9), but it is a very special instance: in
general the expansion coeﬃcients cij, which can be thought of as the entries
in an NA×NB matrix, cannot be written as the product of an NA-dimensional
vector with entries ai and an NB-dimensional vector bj. To see that this is
so, consider the ratio cij/cij′ of the matrix elements in the same row but
diﬀerent columns. When cij can be expressed as the product of two vectors,
we have
cij
cij′ = aibj
aibj′ = bj
bj′ ,
(6.13)
so this ratio is independent of i. That is, when the state of AB can be written
as the product of a state of A and a state of B, the expansion coeﬃcients cij
are restricted such that every row of the matrix that they form is a multiple
of the top row.
Similarly, in this case every column is a multiple of the
leftmost column (Problem 6.3).
When the state of AB cannot be written as the product of a state of A
and a state of B, we say that the subsystems A and B are entangled. As we
have seen, the observables of entangled systems are correlated, so we could as
well say that the subsystems are correlated. It is remarkable that correlations
between subsystems, which are as evident in classical physics as in quantum
mechanics, arise in quantum mechanics through the quintessentially quantum
phenomenon of the addition of quantum amplitudes: states of AB in which
subsystems A and B are correlated are expressed as linear combinations of
states in which A and B are uncorrelated. The use of the word ‘entanglement’
reminds us that correlations arise through an intertwining of states that is
inherently quantum-mechanical and without classical analogue.
It may help to clarify these ideas if we apply them to a hydrogen atom.
We work in the position representation, so we require the amplitude
ψ(xe, xp) = ⟨xe, xp|ψ⟩
(6.14)
to ﬁnd the electron near xe and the proton near xp. Suppose that we have
states
ui(xe) = ⟨xe|ui⟩
and
Uj(xp) = ⟨xp|Uj⟩
(6.15)
that form complete sets for the electron and the proton, respectively. Then
for any state of the atom, |ψ⟩, there are numbers cij such that
|ψ⟩=
X
ij
cij|ui⟩|Uj⟩.
(6.16)
Multiplying through by ⟨xe, xp| we obtain
ψ(xe, xp) =
X
ij
cijui(xe)Uj(xp).
(6.17)
The product of ui and Uj on the right is no longer symbolic: it is an ordinary
product of complex numbers. The quantity cij is the amplitude to ﬁnd the
electron in the state |ui⟩and the proton in the state |Uj⟩.


108
Chapter 6: Composite systems
Box 6.1:
Classical correlations
It’s instructive to consider how we can represent correlations between
two classical systems A and B. Let’s assume that each system has a
ﬁnite number N of discrete states – they might be digital counters on an
instrument panel. Then there are N 2 probabilities cjk to specify.
We can specify the state of A by giving N probabilities aj and
similarly the state of B can be speciﬁed by probabilities bk. We might
choose to express these in terms of their discrete Fourier transforms ˆaα
and ˆbβ, so
aj =
N−1
X
α=0
ˆaαe2πiαj/N
;
bk =
N−1
X
β=0
ˆbβe2πiβk/N
If A and B were uncorrelated, so cjk = ajbk, the state of AB could be
written
cjk =
X
αβ
ˆcαβe2πi(αj+βk)/N,
(1)
where
ˆcαβ = ˆaαbβ.
(2)
In the presence of correlations we can still represent cjk as the double
Fourier sum (1) but then ˆcαβ will not be given by the product of equation
(2). Thus the mathematical manifestation of classical correlations can
be very similar to quantum entanglement. The big diﬀerence is that in
the classical case the expansion coeﬃcients have no physical interpreta-
tion: the basis functions used for expansion (here the circular functions
e2πiαj/N) and the expansion coeﬃcients ˆaα etc., will not be non-negative
so they cannot be interpreted as probability distributions. In quantum
mechanics these quantities acquire physical interpretations. Moreover,
the ﬁnal probabilities, being obtained by mod-squaring a sum like that
of equation (1), involve quantum interference between diﬀerent terms in
the sum.
6.1.1 Collapse of the wavefunction
Consider again the composite system we introduced above in which both A
and B are two-state systems, with |−⟩and |+⟩constituting a basis for A and
|↓⟩and |↑⟩constituting a basis for B. Let AB be in the entangled state
|AB⟩= a|+⟩|↑⟩+ |−⟩(b|↑⟩+ c|↓⟩),
(6.18a)
where b and c are given complex numbers. Then if a measurement of sub-
system A is made and it yields +, the state of AB after the system is
|AB⟩= |+⟩|↑⟩.
(6.18b)
Conversely, if the measurement of A yields −, the state of AB after the
measurement is
|AB⟩=
1
p
|b|2 + |c|2 |−⟩(b|↑⟩+ c|↓⟩).
(6.18c)
These rules are extensions of the usual collapse hypothesis, which we intro-
duced in §idealmeasuresec: there we had a single system and we stated that
when a measurement is made, the state of the system collapses from a linear
combination of states that are each possible outcomes of the measurement to
the particular state that corresponds to the value of the observable actually
measured. That is
|ψ⟩=
X
i
ai|i⟩
→
|ψ⟩= |3⟩,
say.
(6.19)


6.1 Composite systems
109
The new twist in equations (6.18) is that when we expand the state of a
composite system as a linear combination of states of the subsystem we
propose to measure, the coeﬃcients of those states are states of the other
subsystem rather than amplitudes, and these states are the ones the second
system will be in after the ﬁrst system has been measured. Consequently, the
amplitudes we obtain for a subsequent measurement of the second subsystem
depend on the outcome of the ﬁrst measurement: if measurement of A yields
+, then from (6.18b), a measurement of B is certain to yield ↑, while if the
measurement of A yields −, subsequent measurement of B will yield ↓with
probability 1/(|b/c|2 + 1).
6.1.2 Operators for composite systems
While the law of multiplication of probabilities leads to the kets of subsystems
being multiplied, we add the operators of subsystems. For example, if A and
B are both free particles, then the Hamiltonian operator of the composite
system is
HAB = HA + HB =
p2
A
2mA
+ p2
B
2mB
.
(6.20)
In this simple example there is no physical interaction between the parts of
the system, with the consequence that the Hamiltonian splits into a part
that depends only on the operators of A, and a part that depends only on
operators of B. When there is a physical connection between the systems,
there will be an additional part of the Hamiltonian, the interaction Hamil-
tonian that depends on operators belonging to both systems. For example,
if both particles bear electrostatic charge Q, the interaction Hamiltonian
Hint =
Q2
4πǫ0|xA −xB|
(6.21)
should be added to HA + HB to form HAB. For the rest of this subsection
we assume for simplicity that there is no dynamical interaction between the
subsystems.
When an operator acts on a ket that is a product of one describing A
and one describing B, kets that belong to the other system stand idly by as
if they were mere complex numbers. For example
pB|A; i⟩|B; j⟩= |A; i⟩
 pB|B; j⟩

(6.22)
so
⟨A; i′|⟨B; j′|(HA+HB)|A; i⟩|B; j⟩= ⟨A; i′|HA|A; i⟩⟨B; j′|B; j⟩
+ ⟨A; i′|A; i⟩⟨B; j′|HB|B; j⟩
= ⟨A; i′|HA|A; i⟩δjj′ + δii′⟨B; j′|HB|B; j⟩.
(6.23)
When we set i′ = i and j′ = j we obtain the expectation value of HAB when
the system is in the state |A; i⟩|B; j⟩. This is easily seen to be just the sum of
the expectation values of the energies of the two free particles, as one would
expect.
We shall several times have to ﬁnd the eigenvalues and eigenkets of an
operator such as HAB that is the sum of operators HA and HB that belong to
completely diﬀerent subsystems. Every operator of subsystem A commutes
with every operator of subsystem B. Consequently when HAB is given by
equation (6.20),
[HAB, HA] = [HA + HB, HA] = 0.
(6.24)
That is, when there is no physical interaction between the subsystems, so
HAB is just the sum of the Hamiltonians of the individual systems, HAB
commutes with both individual Hamiltonians. It follows that in this case


110
Chapter 6: Composite systems
there is a complete set of mutual eigenkets of HAB, HA and HB. Let {|A; i⟩}
be a complete set of eigenkets of HA with eigenvalues EA
i , and let {|B; i⟩}
be a complete set of eigenkets of HB with eigenvalues EB
j . Then it is trivial
to check that the states |AB; i, j⟩≡|A; i⟩|B; j⟩are eigenkets of HAB with
eigenvalues EA
i + EB
j . Moreover, we showed above that these product kets
form a complete set. So the states |AB; ij⟩form a complete set of mutual
eigenkets of HAB, HA and HB. In the position representation this result
becomes the statement that the wavefunctions
ψAB
ij (xA, xB) ≡⟨xA, xB|AB; ij⟩= uA
i (xA)uB
j (xB)
(6.25)
form a complete set of mutual eigenfunctions for the three operators. That
is, if we have a composite system with a Hamiltonian that is simply the sum
of the Hamiltonians of the parts, we can assume that the eigenfunctions of
the whole system’s Hamiltonian are simply products of eigenfunctions of the
individual component Hamiltonians.
It is instructive to write the tdse for a composite system formed by two
non-interacting subsystems:
i¯h∂|AB⟩
∂t
= i¯h ∂
∂t(|A⟩|B⟩) = i¯h
∂|A⟩
∂t |B⟩+ |A⟩∂|B⟩
∂t

= (HA|A⟩)|B⟩+ |A⟩(HB|B⟩) = (HA + HB)|A⟩|B⟩
= HAB|AB⟩.
(6.26)
Thus we have been able to derive the tdse for the composite system from
the tdse for each subsystem. Notice that the physically evident rule for
adding the Hamiltonians of the subsystem emerges as a consequence of the
ket for the whole system being a product of the kets of the subsystems and
the usual rule for diﬀerentiating a product.
6.1.3 Development of entanglement
Entangled is an appropriate name because subsystems are as prone to become
entangled as is the line of a kite. To justify this statement, we consider the
dynamical evolution of a composite system AB. Without loss of generality
we can use basis states that satisfy the tdses of the isolated subsystems.
That is, the we may assume that the states |A; i⟩, etc, satisfy
i¯h∂|A; i⟩
∂t
= HA|A; i⟩
and
i¯h∂|B; j⟩
∂t
= HB|B; j⟩.
(6.27)
A general state of the composite system is
|AB⟩=
X
ij
cij|A; i⟩|B; j⟩,
(6.28)
where the expansion coeﬃcients cij are all functions of time. The Hamilto-
nian of the composite system can be written
HAB = HA + HB + Hint,
(6.29)
where the interaction Hamiltonian Hint is the part of HAB that contains
operators belonging to both subsystems (cf eq. 6.21). Substituting this ex-
pression for HAB and the expansion (6.28) into the tdse for the composite
system (eq. 6.26), we ﬁnd
i¯h∂|AB⟩
∂t
= i¯h
X
ij
dcij
dt |A; i⟩|B; j⟩+ cij
∂|A; i⟩
∂t
|B; j⟩+ |A; i⟩∂|B; j⟩
∂t

=
X
ij
cij {(HA|A; i⟩)|B; j⟩+ |A; i⟩(HB|B; j⟩) + Hint|A; i⟩|B; j⟩} .
(6.30)


6.1 Composite systems
111
After using equations (6.27) to cancel terms, this simpliﬁes to
i¯h
X
ij
dcij
dt |A; i⟩|B; j⟩=
X
ij
cijHint|A; i⟩|B; j⟩,
(6.31)
which states that the time evolution of the expansion coeﬃcients is entirely
driven by the interaction Hamiltonian. In particular, if there is no coupling
between the systems (Hint = 0), the cij are constant, so if the systems are
initially unentangled, they remain so.
By multiplying equation (6.31) through by ⟨A; k|⟨B; l| we obtain an
equation that is most conveniently written
i¯hdckl
dt
=
X
ij
cij⟨AB; kl|Hint|AB; ij⟩.
(6.32)
Let’s suppose that all the matrix elements in this equation vanish except
an element ⟨AB; k0l0|Hint|AB; k0l0⟩which lies on the diagonal. Then only
ck0l0 will have non-vanishing time derivative, so the condition for the sub-
systems to be unentangled, namely that cij/cij′ is independent of i, which
is initially satisﬁed, will soon be violated by the ratio ck0l0/ck0j for j̸ = l0.
Careful consideration of what happens when there are several non-vanishing
matrix elements leads to the same conclusion: almost any coupling between
subsystems will cause them to become entangled from an unentangled initial
condition.
This result is not surprising physically: a coupling makes the motion
of one system dependent on the state of the other. So after some time the
state that the second system has reached depends on the state of the ﬁrst
system, which is just to say that the two systems have become correlated or
entangled.
6.1.4 Einstein–Podolski–Rosen experiment
In 1935 A. Einstein, B. Podolski and N. Rosen (EPR for short) proposed1
an experiment with entangled particles that they argued would demonstrate
that quantum mechanics is an incomplete theory in the sense that to specify
the state of a physical system you need to know the values taken by hidden
variables that quantum mechanics does not consider.
In 1964 J.S. Bell
showed2 that for a similar experiment quantum mechanics makes predictions
that are incompatible with the existence of hidden variables. In 1972 an
experiment of this type was successfully carried out3 and its results were
found to vindicate quantum mechanics. We now describe Bell’s formulation
of the experiment and discuss its implications.
A nucleus decays from a state that has no spin to another spinless state
by emitting an electron and a positron. The nucleus is at rest both before and
after the decay, so the electron and positron move away in opposite directions
with equal speeds. As we saw in §1.3.5, electrons and positrons are spinning
particles so they each carry some spin angular momentum away from the
nucleus. Since the nucleus is at all times without angular momentum, the
angular momenta of the electron and positron must be equal and opposite.
At some distance from the decaying nucleus Alice detects the electron and
measures the component of its spin in the direction of her choice, a. As
we saw in §1.3.5, the result of this measurement will be either + 1
2 or −1
2.
Meanwhile Bob, who sits a similar distance from the nucleus to Alice, detects
the positron and measures its spin in the direction of his choice, b.
After Alice has obtained + 1
2 on measuring the spin along a she thinks:
“If Bob measures along a too, he must measure −1
2. But if Bob measures
1 E. Einstein, B. Podolski & N. Rosen, Phys. Rev., 47, 777 (1935)
2 J.S. Bell, Phyics, 1, 195 (1964)
3 S.J. Freedman & J.F. Clauser, Phys. Rev. L., 28, 938 (1972)


112
Chapter 6: Composite systems
along some other vector b, I cannot be certain what value he will get, but he
isn’t likely to get + 1
2 if b is only slightly inclined to my vector a, that is, if
1−a·b ≪1.” Alice can see that conservation of angular momentum implies
that the results obtained by Bob and herself must be correlated. Let’s put
this argument on a quantitative basis.
In §7.5.1 we shall see that because the system formed by the electron-
positron pair has no net angular momentum, its state can be written
|ψ⟩=
1
√2 (|e+⟩|p−⟩−|e−⟩|p+⟩) .
(6.33)
Here |e+⟩is the state in which the component of the electron’s spin along
the z-axis is certain to be + 1
2, and similarly for |p±⟩, etc. We are free to
orient the z-axis parallel to Alice’s choice of direction a, so we do this. When
Alice obtains + 1
2, she collapses the system’s state into
|ψ′⟩= |e+⟩|p−⟩.
(6.34)
Before Alice’s measurement, when the state was given by equation (6.33),
the amplitude for a measurement of the positron’s spin along a to yield + 1
2
was 1/√2, but after the measurement equation (6.34) shows that it vanishes,
just as Alice reasoned it would. To ﬁnd the amplitude for Bob to measure for
the positron + 1
2 along another vector b, we recall equation equation (1.34)a
from §1.3.5:
|+, b⟩= sin(θ/2) eiφ/2|p−⟩+ cos(θ/2) e−iφ/2|p+⟩,
(6.35)
where θ and φ are the polar angles that give the orientation of b in a system
in which a is along the z-axis. In particular
cos θ = a · b.
(6.36)
Given that after Alice’s measurement the positron is certainly in the state
|p−⟩, it follows from equation (6.35) that the amplitude for Bob to measure
+ 1
2 along his chosen direction is ⟨+, b|p−⟩= sin(θ/2)e−iφ/2. Mod-squaring
this amplitude we ﬁnd that the probability that Bob measures + 1
2 is
PB(+|A+) = sin2(θ/2),
(6.37)
which is small when a ≃b as Alice predicted. So quantum mechanics is
consistent with common sense.
We have supposed that Alice measures ﬁrst, but if the electron and
positron are moving relativistically, a light signal sent to Bob by Alice when
she made her measurement would not have arrived at Bob when he made his
measurement, and vice versa. In these circumstances the theory of relativity
teaches us that the order in which the measurements are made depends on
the velocity of the observer who is judging the matter. Consequently, for
consistency the predictions of quantum mechanics must be independent of
who is supposed to make the ﬁrst measurement and to collapse the system’s
state.
It is easy to see from the discussion above that this condition is
satisﬁed.
What worried EPR was that after Alice’s measurement there is a di-
rection in which Bob will never ﬁnd + 1
2 for the positron’s spin, and this
direction depends on what direction Alice chooses to use. This fact seems
to imply that the positron somehow ‘knows’ what Alice measured for the
electron, and the collapse of the system’s state from (6.33) to (6.34) seems
to conﬁrm this suspicion. Since relativity forbids news of Alice’s work on
the electron from inﬂuencing the positron at the time of Bob’s measurement,
EPR argued that the required information must have travelled out with the


6.1 Composite systems
113
positron in the form of a hidden variable which was correlated at the time
of the nuclear decay with a matching hidden variable in the electron.
The existence of hidden variables would explain the probabilistic nature
of quantum mechanics (which Einstein intensely disliked) because the uncer-
tain outcomes of experiments would reﬂect our ignorance of the values taken
by the hidden variables; the uncertainty would be banished once a better
theory gave us access to these variables.
Bell’s inequality
Remarkably, Bell was able to show that any hidden
variable theory will yield a weaker correlation than quantum mechanics be-
tween the measurements of Alice and Bob as functions of the angle θ between
their chosen directions. Let’s denote the results of Alice’s and Bob’s mea-
surements by σA = ± 1
2 and σB = ± 1
2 and calculate the expectation value
of the product σAσB. There are just four cases to consider, so the desired
expectation value is
⟨σAσB⟩= 1
4{PA(+)PB(+|A+) + PA(−)PB(−|A−)
−PA(+)PB(−|A+) −PA(−)PB(+|A−)},
(6.38)
where PA(+) is the probability that Alice obtains σA = + 1
2 and PB(−|A+)
is the probability that Bob ﬁnds σB = −1
2 given that Alice has measured
σA = + 1
2.
Since nothing is known about the orientation of the electron
before Alice makes her measurement
PA(+) = PA(−) = 1
2.
(6.39)
We showed above (eq. 6.37) that PB(+|A+) = sin2(θ/2), so
PB(−|A+) = 1 −PB(+|A+) = cos2(θ/2).
(6.40)
Putting these results into equation (6.38) we have
⟨σAσB⟩= 1
4{sin2(θ/2) −cos2(θ/2)} = −1
4 cos θ = −1
4a · b,
(6.41)
which agrees with Alice’s simple argument when a ≃±b.
Consider now the case that the result of measuring the electron’s spin
in the direction a is completely determined by the values taken by hidden
variables in addition to a. That is, if we knew the values of these variables,
we could predict with certainty the result of measuring the component of
the electron’s spin in the direction of any unit vector a and Alice is only
uncertain what result she will get because she is ignorant of the values of
the hidden variables. We consider the variables to be the components of
some n-dimensional vector v, and have that the result of measuring the
electron’s spin along a is a function σe(v, a) that takes the values ± 1
2 only.
Similarly, the result of measuring the positron’s spin along a unit vector b
is a function σp(v, b) that is likewise restricted to the values ± 1
2. As Alice
argued, conservation of angular momentum implies that
σe(v, a) = −σp(v, a).
(6.42)
The outcome of a measurement is uncertain because the value of v is uncer-
tain. We quantify whatever knowledge we do have by assigning a probability
density ρ(v) to v, which is such that the probability that v lies in the in-
ﬁnitesimal n-dimensional volume dnv is dP = ρ(v) dnv. In terms of ρ the
expectation value of interest is
⟨σe(a)σp(b)⟩=
Z
dnv ρ(v)σe(v, a)σp(v, b)
= −
Z
dnv ρ(v)σe(v, a)σe(v, b),
(6.43)


114
Chapter 6: Composite systems
Figure 6.1 For a family of choices
of the vectors a, b and b′, quantum
mechanics predicts that the left side
of Bell’s inequality (6.46) is larger
than the right side, contrary to the
prediction of any hidden-variable
theory.
where the second equality uses equation (6.42).
Now suppose Bob sometimes measures the spin of the positron parallel
to b′ rather than b. Then the fact that σ2
e(v, b) = 1
4 allows us to write
⟨σe(a)σp(b)⟩−⟨σe(a)σp(b′)⟩= −
Z
dnv ρ(v)σe(v, a){σe(v, b) −σe(v, b′)}
= −
Z
dnv ρ(v)σe(v, a)σe(v, b){1 −4σe(v, b)σe(v, b′)}.
(6.44)
We now take the absolute value of each side and note that the curly bracket
in the integral is non-negative, while the product σe(v, a)σe(v, b) in front of
it ﬂuctuates between ± 1
4. Hence we obtain an upper limit on the value of
the integral by replacing σe(v, a)σe(v, b) by 1
4, and have
|⟨σe(a)σp(b)⟩−⟨σe(a)σp(b′)⟩| ≤1
4
Z
dnv ρ(v){1 −4σe(v, b)σe(v, b′)}.
(6.45)
We break the right side into two integrals. The ﬁrst, R dnv ρ(v), evaluates
to unity because ρ is a probability density, while changing b →b′ and
a →b in equation (6.43) we see that the the second integral evaluates to
−4⟨σe(b)σp(b′)⟩. Hence we have that
|⟨σe(a)σp(b)⟩−⟨σe(a)σp(b′)⟩| ≤1
4 + ⟨σe(b)σp(b′)⟩.
(6.46)
This is Bell’s inequality, which must hold for any three unit vectors a, b
and b′ if hidden variables exist. It can be tested experimentally as follows:
for a large number of trials Alice measures the electron’s spin along a while
Bob measures the positron’s spin along b in half the trials and along b′ in
the other half.
From the results of these trials the value of the left side
of equation (6.46) can be estimated.
The value of the right side is then
estimated from a new series of trials in which Alice measures the electron’s
spin along b and Bob measures the positron’s spin along b′.
An obvious question is whether Bell’s inequality is consistent with the
quantum-mechanical result ⟨σe(a)σp(b)⟩= −1
4a · b (eq. 6.41). When we
substitute this expression into each side we get
lhs = 1
4|a · (b −b′)|
;
rhs = 1
4(1 −b · b′).
(6.47)
Let’s choose a·b = 0 and b′ = b cos φ+a sin φ so as we increase the parameter
φ from zero to π/2 b′ swings continuously from b to a. For this choice of b′
we easily ﬁnd that
lhs = 1
4| sin φ|
;
rhs = 1
4(1 −cos φ).
(6.48)
These expressions for the left and right sides of Bell’s inequality are plotted
in Figure 6.1: we see that the inequality is violated for all values of φ other


6.1 Composite systems
115
than 0 and π/2. Thus the quantum-mechanical result is inconsistent with
Bell’s inequality and is therefore inconsistent with the existence of hidden
variables.
Inequalities similar to (6.46) can be derived for systems other than spin-
half particles, including pairs of entangled photons. Experiments with pho-
tons have produced results that agree with the predictions of quantum me-
chanics to suﬃcient precision that they violate the relevant Bell inequalities.4
Consequently, these experiments rule out the possibility that hidden variables
exist.
What general conclusions can we draw from the EPR experiment?
• A measurement both updates our knowledge of a system and disturbs the
system. Alice’s measurement disturbs the electron but not the positron,
and gains her information about both particles.
• Quantum mechanics requires wholistic thinking:
when studying the
EPR experiment we must consider the system formed by both parti-
cles together rather than treating the particles in isolation. We shall
encounter a more spectacular example of this requirement below in con-
nection with ideal gases.
• Many discussions of the EPR experiment generate needless confusion
by supposing that after Alice has measured + 1
2 for the component of
the electron’s spin parallel to a, the spin is aligned with a. We shall
see in §7.4.2 that the electron also has half a unit of angular momentum
in each of the x and y directions, although the signs of these other
components are unknown when we know the value of sz. Hence the
most Alice can know about the orientation of the spin vector is that it
lies in a particular hemisphere. Whatever hemisphere Alice determines,
she can argue that the positron’s spin lies in the opposite hemisphere.
So if Alice ﬁnds the electron’s spin to lie in the northern hemisphere,
she concludes that the positron’s spin lies in the southern hemisphere.
This knowledge excludes only one result from the myriad of possibilities
open to Bob: namely he cannot ﬁnd sz = + 1
2. He is unlikely to ﬁnd + 1
2
if he measures the component of spin along a vector b that lies close to
the z axis because the hemisphere associated with this result has a small
overlap with the southern hemisphere, but since there is an overlap, the
result + 1
2 is not excluded. Contrary to the claims of EPR, the results of
Bob’s measurements are consistent with the hemisphere containing the
positron’s spin being ﬁxed at the outset and being unaﬀected by Alice’s
measurement.
• The experimental demonstration that Bell inequalities are violated es-
tablishes that quantum mechanics will not be superseded by a theory
in which the spin vector has a deﬁnite direction. In §7.4.1 we shall see
that macroscopic objects only appear to have well deﬁned orientations
because they are not in states of well-deﬁned spin. That is, the idea
that a spin vector points in a well deﬁned direction is a classical notion
and not applicable to objects such as electrons that do have a deﬁnite
spin. This idea is an old friend from which we part company as sadly as
after studying relativity we parted company with the concept of univer-
sal time. The world we grew accustomed to in playgroup is not the real
world, but an approximation to it that is useful on macroscopic scales.
The study of physics forces one to move on and let childish things go.
4 e.g., W. Tittel et al., PRL, 81, 3563 (1998)


116
Chapter 6: Composite systems
6.2 Quantum computing
There’s an old story about a mathematician at the court of the Chinese em-
peror. The mathematician had advised the emperor wisely and the emperor,
wishing to express his gratitude in a manner worthy of his greatness, asked
the mathematician to name the reward he would like to receive. “Oh great
Emperor, your oﬀer is too liberal for one who has rendered you such a slight
service. Let a chess board be brought and one grain of rice be placed on the
ﬁrst square, two on the second, four on the third, eight on the fourth, and
so on till every square of the board has received an allocation of rice.” The
emperor was pleased by the modesty of the mathematician’s proposal and
ordered it be done. Great was his shock and annoyance the next day when it
was reported to him that all the rice in his great silos had proved insuﬃcient
to pay the mathematician his due. For 264 −1 ∼1019 grains of rice would
be needed to supply the 64 squares on the board. That’s ∼1012 tons of rice
and vastly more than all the rice on the planet.5
What is the relevance of this old story for quantum mechanics? We have
seen that a system made of two two-state systems has four basis states. If we
add a further two-state system to this four-state composite system, we obtain
a system with 2 × 4 = 8 basis states. By the time we have built a system
from 64 two-state systems, our composite system will have 264 ∼1019 basis
states. Sixty four two-state systems might be constructed from 64 atoms
or even 64 electrons, so could be physically miniscule. But to calculate the
dynamics of this miniscule system we would have to integrate the equations
of motion of 1019 amplitudes! This is seriously bad news for physics.
The idea behind quantum computing is to turn this disappointment
for physics into a boon for mathematics.
We may not be able to solve
1019 equations of motion, but Nature can evolve the physical system, and
appropriate measurements made on the system should enable us to discover
what the results of our computations would have been if we had the time to
carry them out. If this approach to computation can be made to work in
practice, calculations will become possible that could never be completed on
a conventional computer.
The ﬁrst step towards understanding how a quantum computer would
work is to map integers onto the basis states of our system. In this context
we refer to a two-state system as a qubit and call its basis states |0⟩and
|1⟩. A set of N qubits forms a register, which has a complete set of states
of the form |x⟩|x′⟩· · · |x′′⟩, where x, x′, etc., = 0, 1 indicate the states of the
constituent qubits. Now given a number in binary form, such as 7 = 4 + 2 +
1 = 111, we associate it with the basis state of the register |0⟩. . . |0⟩|1⟩|1⟩|1⟩.
In this way we establish a one to one correspondence between the integers
0 to 2N −1 and the basis states of a register that comprises N qubits. We
use this correspondence to establish a more compact notation for the basis
states of the register, writing |7⟩instead of |0⟩. . . |0⟩|1⟩|1⟩|1⟩, etc.
This arrangement mirrors the correspondence in a classical computer
between numbers and the states of a classical register formed by N classical
two-state systems or bits.
The crucial diﬀerence between quantum and
classical registers is that whereas a classical register is always in a state that
is associated with a deﬁnite number, the generic state |ψ⟩of a quantum
register is a linear combination of states that are associated with diﬀerent
numbers:
|ψ⟩=
2N−1
X
j=0
cj|j⟩.
(6.49)
Thus nearly all states of a quantum register are not associated with individ-
ual numbers but with all representable numbers simultaneously. We shall see
that this ability of a single state of a quantum register to be associated with
5 According to the International Rice Search Institute, in 2007 global rice production
was 650 million tons.


6.2 Quantum computing
117
a huge number of integers enables a quantum computer to conduct massively
parallel computations.
The central processor unit (CPU) of a classical computer is a pro-
grammable mechanism that reads a number n from an input register and
places the number f(n) into the output register, where f is the function
that the CPU is currently programmed to evaluate. By analogy one might
imagine that a quantum computer would consist of a quantum register and
a programmable Hamiltonian H that would cause the state |n⟩to evolve in
some speciﬁed time T into the state |f(n)⟩= e−iHT/¯h|n⟩. Unfortunately this
conception is ﬂawed because this machine could not evaluate any function
that took the same value on diﬀerent arguments, so f(n) = f(m) = F, say,
for some values n̸ = m. To see why the computer could not evaluate such a
function recall that the operator U ≡e−iHT/¯h is unitary, so it has an inverse
U †. But we have U|n⟩= U|m⟩= |F⟩, and if we apply U † to |F⟩we must
get both |m⟩and |n⟩, which is absurd.
We get around this problem by making our quantum computer slightly
more complex: we let it have two registers, a control register X and a
data register Y. The computer then has a basis of states |x⟩|y⟩, where x is
the number stored in the control register and y is the number stored in the
data register. We conjecture that we can ﬁnd a Hamiltonian such that for
any function f the state |x⟩|y⟩evolves in time T into the state |x⟩|y + f(x)⟩.
Adding the second register solves the problem we encountered above because
applying U to |n⟩|y⟩we get |n⟩|y+F⟩which is a diﬀerent state from what we
get when we apply U to |m⟩|y⟩, namely |m⟩|y+F⟩: adding the extra register
allows the computer to remember the state it was in before the machine
cycle started, and this memory makes it logically possible for U † to restore
the earlier state.
Adding the second register may have demolished an objection to our
original most naive proposal, but is it really possible to construct a time-
evolution operator that would enable us to evaluate any function f(x)? This
question is answered aﬃrmatively in two stages. First one deﬁnes a handful
of unitary operators U that perform basic bit manipulations on our registers,
and shows that using a sequence of such operators one can perform any of
the standard arithmetical operations, adding, subtracting, multiplying and
dividing. Second, for each of these operators U one designs an experiment
in which U gives the evolution of a two-state quantum system over some
time interval.
Currently many groups use photons as qubits, identifying
|0⟩and |1⟩with either right- and left-handed circular polarisation, or with
linear polarisation in two orthogonal directions. Other groups use electrons
as qubits, identifying |0⟩and |1⟩as states in which the spin in some given
direction is either
1
2 or −1
2.
All such work with real qubits is extremely
challenging and in its infancy, but it has already established that there is no
objection in principle to realising the simple unitary operators that quantum
computing requires. It is too early to tell what physical form qubits will take
when quantum computing becomes a mature technology. Consequently, we
leave to one side the question of how our operators are to be realised and
focus instead on what operators we require and what could be achieved with
them when they have been realised.
The simplest computer has two one-qubit registers, with a basis of states
|0⟩|0⟩, |0⟩|1⟩, |1⟩|0⟩and |1⟩|1⟩– we shall refer to basis states of a register with
any number of qubits ordered thus by increasing value of the stored number
as the computational basis. In the computational basis of our two-qubit
system, the operator U+ that performs addition (|x⟩|y⟩→|x⟩|y+x⟩) has the


118
Chapter 6: Composite systems
unitary matrix6
U+ =



1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0


.
(6.50)
To justify this claim we note that



1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0






α
β
γ
δ


=



α
β
δ
γ



(6.51)
so U+ causes the state of the computer
|ψ⟩= α|0⟩|0⟩+ β|0⟩|1⟩+ γ|1⟩|0⟩+ δ|1⟩|1⟩
(6.52)
to evolve into
U+|ψ⟩= α|0⟩|0⟩+ β|0⟩|1⟩+ γ|1⟩|1⟩+ δ|1⟩|0⟩,
(6.53)
so the second qubit is indeed incremented by the ﬁrst modulo 2.
U+ is a simple example of an operator in which the state of the data
register is changed in a way that depends on the state of the control register
while the state of the control register stays the same. Such operators are
called controlled-U operators. Another useful operator is the controlled-
phase operator, which in the computational basis has the matrix
Uφ =



1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
eiφ


.
(6.54)
Uφ has no eﬀect on the ﬁrst three states of the computational basis, and it
multiplies the phase of the last state by eiφ. It is straightforward to show
that
Uφ|x⟩|y⟩= eixyφ|x⟩|y⟩
(6.55)
by checking that the two sides match for all four possible values of (x, y).
It can be shown that any unitary transformation of an n-qubit register
can be simulated if we augment U+ and Uφ with two operators that work
on just one qubit. One of these extra operators is the phase operator U 1
φ,
which leaves |0⟩invariant and increments the phase of |1⟩by φ:
U 1
φ|0⟩= |0⟩
U 1
φ|1⟩= eiφ|1⟩
)
⇔
U 1
φ|x⟩= eiφx|x⟩
⇔
U 1
φ =

1
0
0
eiφ

.
(6.56)
The other single-qubit operator that we need is the Hadamard operator,
which in the computational basis, |0⟩|1⟩, has the matrix
UH =
1
√2

1
1
1
−1

.
(6.57)
The Hadamard operator takes a state that represents a number, such as |0⟩,
and turns it into a state that is a linear combination of the two representable
numbers: UH|0⟩= (|0⟩+ |1⟩)/√2. Conversely, because U 2
H = I so UH is
6 Here x + y must be understood to mean x + y mod 2 because quantum computers
like classical computers do arithmetic modulo one more than the largest number that they
can store.


6.2 Quantum computing
119
Figure 6.2 Schematic diagram to show how two Hadamard operators and two phase shift
operators suﬃce to transform |0⟩into an arbitrary state of a qubit.
Figure 6.3 Evaluating f on every
argument simultaneously. The top
three qubits form the control reg-
ister, which is initially in the state
|0⟩.
its own inverse, it turns these linear combinations of numbers into actual
numbers: UH(|0⟩+ |1⟩)/√2 = |0⟩.
Complex operations on qubits can be built up by sequences of phase and
Hadamard operators and such sequences are conveniently described using
the graphical notation of Figure 6.2. Each qubit is represented by a line
along which the state of the qubit ﬂows from left to right. In the simple
example shown, the state |0⟩is converted by the ﬁrst Hadamard operator to
(|0⟩+ |1⟩)/√2, and U 1
2θ converts this to
1
√2
 |0⟩+ e2iθ|1⟩

.
(6.58a)
After the next Hadamard operator this becomes
1
2
 |0⟩+ |1⟩+ e2iθ(|0⟩−|1⟩)

= 1
2
 1 + e2iθ
|0⟩+
 1 −e2iθ
|1⟩
	
= eiθ {cos θ|0⟩−i sin θ|1⟩} .
(6.58b)
Finally, application of the phase-shift operator U 1
φ+π/2 converts this to
|ψ⟩≡eiθ  cos θ|0⟩+ eiφ sin θ|1⟩

.
(6.58c)
By choosing the values of θ and φ appropriately, we can make |ψ⟩any chosen
state of the qubit. Thus the phase-shift and Hadamard operators form a
complete set of single-qubit operators.
If we apply a Hadamard operator to each qubit of an 2-qubit register
that is initially in the state |0⟩|0⟩, we get
(UH|0⟩) (UH|0⟩) = 1
2 (|0⟩+ |1⟩) (|0⟩+ |1⟩)
= 1
2 (|1⟩|1⟩+ |1⟩|0⟩+ |0⟩|1⟩+ |0⟩|0⟩)
= 1
2 (|3⟩+ |2⟩+ |1⟩+ |0⟩) .
(6.59)
That is, by setting the register to zero and then applying a Hadamard oper-
ator to each of its qubits, we put the register into a linear superposition of
the states associated with each representable number. It is easy to see that
this result generalises to n-qubit registers.7 Using this trick we can simul-
taneously evaluate a function on every representable argument, simply by
evaluating the function on the state of the control register immediately after
it has been processed by the Hadamard operators. Figure 6.3 illustrates this
process, which is described by the equations
7 In fact, applying Hadamard operators to the qubits of an n-qubit register when it is
set to any number will put the register into a linear superposition of states associated with
all representable numbers, but if the initial state of the register diﬀers from |0⟩, exactly
half of the coeﬃcients in the sum will be −2−n/2 and half +2−n/2 (Problem 6.6).


120
Chapter 6: Composite systems
Box 6.2:
Deutsch’s algorithm
Given a function f(x) that takes an n-bit argument and returns either 0
or 1, the exercise is to determine whether f is a constant or ‘balanced’
function. To this end we build a computer with an n-qubit control regis-
ter and a single qubit data register. We set the control register to |0⟩and
the data register to |1⟩and operate on every qubit with the Hadamard
operator UH. Then the computer’s state is
1
2(n+1)/2
2n−1
X
x=0
|x⟩

(|0⟩−|1⟩).
(1)
Now we evaluate the function f in the usual way, after which the com-
puter’s state is
1
2(n+1)/2
 X
x
|x⟩(|f(x)⟩−|1 + f(x)⟩)
!
.
(2)
Given that f(x) = 0, 1, it is straightforward to convince oneself that
(|f(x)⟩−|1 + f(x)⟩) = (−1)f(x)(|0⟩−|1⟩) so the computer’s state can be
written
1
2(n+1)/2
 X
x
(−1)f(x)|x⟩
!
(|0⟩−|1⟩).
(3)
We now operate on every qubit with UH for a second time. The data
register returns to |1⟩because UH is its own inverse, while the control
register only returns to |0⟩if we can take the factor (−1)f(x) out of
the sum over x, making the state of the control register a multiple of
P
x |x⟩; if f is ‘balanced’, half of the factors (−1)f(x) are +1 and half −1
and in this case UH moves the control register to a state |y⟩for y̸ = 0
(Problem 6.6). Hence by measuring the state of the control register, we
discover whether f is constant or balanced: if the control register is set
to zero, f is constant, and if it holds any other number, f is balanced.
|0⟩|0⟩
UH
→
1
2n/2
2n−1
X
x=0
|x⟩|0⟩
f→
1
2n/2
2n−1
X
x=0
|x⟩|f(x)⟩.
(6.60)
After the evaluation of f, the computer’s state depends on every possible
value of f. So the state of a 64-qubit computer will depend on the 264 ≃
1019 possible values of f. By exploiting this fact, can we conduct massively
parallel computations with just a pair of quantum registers?
The question is, how can we learn about the values that f takes? An
obvious strategy is to read oﬀa numerical value X from the control register
by collapsing each of its qubits into either the state |0⟩or the state |1⟩.
Once this has been done, the state of the composite system |x⟩|y⟩will have
collapsed from that given on the right of (6.60) to |X⟩|f(X)⟩, so f(X) can
be determined by inspecting each of the qubits of the data register. The
trouble with this strategy is that it only returns one value of f, and that for
a random argument X. Hence if our quantum computer is to outperform a
classical computer, we must avoid collapsing the computer’s state by reading
its registers. Instead we should try to answer questions about f that have
simple answers but ones that involve all the values taken by f.
For example, suppose we know that f(x) only takes the values 0 and 1,
and that it is either a constant function (i.e., either f(x) = 1 for all x, or
f(x) = 0 for all x) or it is a ‘balanced function’ in the sense that f(x) = 0 for
half of the possible values of x and 1 for the remaining values. The question
we have to answer is “is f constant or balanced?” With a classical computer
you would have to keep evaluating f on diﬀerent values of x until either you


6.3 Density operator
121
got two diﬀerent values (which would establish that f was balanced) or more
than half of the possible values of x had been tried (which would establish
that f was constant). In Box 6.2 we show that from (6.60) we can discover
whether f is constant or balanced with only a handful of machine cycles.
The algorithm given in Box 6.2 is an extension of one invented by
Deutsch8, which was an early example of how the parallel-computing po-
tential of a quantum computer could be harnessed. Subsequently algorithms
were developed that dramatically accelerate database searches9 and the de-
composition of large numbers into their prime factors.
The usefulness of
the internet depends on eﬀective cryptography, which currently relies on
the diﬃculty of prime-number decomposition. Hence by rendering existing
cryptographic systems ineﬀective, the successful construction of a quantum
computer would have a big impact on the world economy.
Notwithstanding strenuous eﬀorts around the world, quantum comput-
ing remains a dream that will not be realised very soon. Its central idea is
that the the integers up to 2N −1 can be mapped into the base states of an
N-qubit quantum register, so a general state of such a register is associated
with all representable integers, and the time evolution of the register involves
massively parallel computing. The ﬁeld is challenging both experimentally
and theoretically. The challenge for theorists is to devise algorithms that
extract information from a quantum register given that any measurement
of the register collapses its state and thus erases much of the information
that was encoded in it before a measurement was made. Experimentally, the
challenge is to isolate quantum registers from their environment suﬃciently
well that they do not become signiﬁcantly entangled with the environment
during a computation. We discuss the process of becoming entangled with
the environment in the next section.
6.3 The density operator
To this point in this book we have assumed that we know what quantum
state our system is in. For macroscopic objects this assumption is completely
unrealistic, for how can we possibly discover the quantum states of the ∼1023
carbon atoms in a diamond, or even the ∼105 atoms in a protein molecule?
To achieve this goal for a diamond, at least 1023 observables would have
to be measured, and the number would in reality be vastly greater because
individual atoms would be entangled with one another, making the state of
the diamond a linear combination of basis states of the form |a1⟩|a2⟩. . . |aN⟩,
where |ai⟩denotes a state of the ith atom. It is time we squared up to the
reality of our ignorance of the quantum states of macro- and meso-scopic
objects.
Actually, we need to be cautious even when asserting that we know the
quantum state of atomic-scale objects. The claim that the state of a system
is known is generally justiﬁed by the assertion that a measurement has just
been made, with the result that the system’s state has been collapsed into
a known eigenstate of the operator of the given observable. This procedure
for establishing the quantum state of a system is unrealistic in that it makes
no allowance for experimental error, which we all know to be endemic in real
laboratories: real experiments lead to the conclusion that the value of an
observable is x ± y, which is shorthand for “the probability distribution for
the value of the observable is centred on x and has a width of the order y.”
Since the measurement leaves the value of the observable uncertain, it does
not determine the quantum state precisely either.
Let us admit that we don’t know what state our system is in, but conjec-
ture that the system is in one of a complete set of states {|n⟩}, and for each
8 D. Deutsch, Proc. R. Soc., 400, 97 (1985)
9 L. K. Grover, STOC’96, 212 (1996)


122
Chapter 6: Composite systems
value of n assign a probability pn that it’s in the state |n⟩.10 It’s important
to be clear that we are not saying that the system is in the state
|φ⟩=
X
n
√pn|n⟩.
(6.61)
That is a well-deﬁned quantum state, and we are admitting that we don’t
know the system’s state. What we are saying is that the system may be in
state |1⟩, or in state |2⟩, or state |3⟩, and assigning probabilities p1, p2, . . .
to each of these possibilities.
Given this incomplete information, the expectation value of measuring
some observable Q will be p1 times the expectation value that Q will have
if the system is in the state |1⟩, plus p2 times the expectation value for the
case that the system is in the state |2⟩, etc. That is
Q =
X
n
pn⟨n|Q|n⟩,
(6.62)
where we have introduced a new notation Q to denote the expectation value
of Q when we have incomplete knowledge. When our knowledge of a system
is incomplete, we say that the system is in an impure state, and corre-
spondingly we sometimes refer to a regular state |ψ⟩as a pure state. This
terminology is unfortunate because a system in an ‘impure state’ is in a per-
fectly good quantum state; the problem is that we are uncertain what state
it is in – it is our knowledge of the system that’s impure, not the system’s
state.
It is instructive to rewrite equation (6.62) by inserting either side of Q
identity operators I = P
j |qj⟩⟨qj| that are made out of the eigenkets of Q.
Then we have
Q =
X
nkj
pn⟨n|qk⟩⟨qk|Q|qj⟩⟨qj|n⟩=
X
nj
qjpn|⟨qj|n⟩|2,
(6.63)
where the second equality follows from Q|qj⟩= qj|qj⟩and the orthonormality
of the kets |qj⟩. Equation (6.63) states that the expectation value of Q is the
sum of the possible measurement values qj times the probability pn|⟨qj|n⟩|2
of obtaining this value, which is the product of the probability of the system
being in the state |n⟩and the probability of obtaining qj in the case that it
is.
Now consider the density operator
ρ ≡
X
n
pn|n⟩⟨n|,
(6.64)
where the pn are the probabilities introduced above. This deﬁnition is rem-
iniscent of the deﬁnition
Q =
X
j
qj|qj⟩⟨qj|
(6.65)
of the operator associated with an observable (eq. 2.9). In particular, ρ is
a Hermitian operator because the pn are real. It should not be considered
an observable, however, because the pn are subjective not objective: they
quantify our state of knowledge rather than hard physical reality. For exam-
ple, if our records of the results of measurements become scrambled, perhaps
through some failure of electronics in the data-acquisition system, our values
of the pn will change but the system will not. By contrast the spectrum {qj}
10 See Problem 6.9 for a diﬀerent and more physically plausible physical assumption.


6.3 Density operator
123
Box 6.3:
Properties of Tr
The trace operator Tr extracts a complex number from an operator. We
now show that although its deﬁnition (6.67) is in terms of a particular
basis {|m⟩}, its value is independent of the basis used. Let {|qj⟩} be any
other basis. Then we insert identity operators I = P
j |qj⟩⟨qj| either side
of A in Tr A = P
n⟨n|A|n⟩:
Tr A =
X
njk
⟨n|qj⟩⟨qj|A|qk⟩⟨qk|n⟩=
X
kjn
⟨qj|A|qk⟩⟨qk|n⟩⟨n|qj⟩
=
X
j
⟨qj|A|qj⟩,
(1)
where we have used I = P
n |n⟩⟨n| and ⟨qk|qj⟩= δkj.
Another useful result is that for any two operators A and B,
Tr(AB) = Tr(BA):
Tr(AB) =
X
n
⟨n|AB|n⟩=
X
nm
⟨n|A|m⟩⟨m|B|n⟩
=
X
nm
⟨m|B|n⟩⟨n|A|m⟩=
X
m
⟨m|BA|m⟩= Tr(BA).
(2)
By making the substitutions B →C and A →AB in this result we infer
that
Tr(ABC) = Tr(CAB).
(3)
of Q is determined by the laws of nature and is independent of the complete-
ness of our knowledge. Thus the density operator introduces a qualitatively
new feature into the theory: subjectivity.
To see the point of the density operator, we use equations (6.64) and
(6.65) to rewrite the operator product ρQ:
ρQ =
X
nj
pnqj|n⟩⟨n|qj⟩⟨qj|.
(6.66)
When this equation is premultiplied by ⟨m| and postmultiplied by |m⟩and
the result summed over m, the right side becomes the same as the right side
of equation (6.63) for Q. That is,
Tr(ρQ) ≡
X
m
⟨m|ρQ|m⟩= Q,
(6.67)
where ‘Tr’ is short for ‘trace’ because the sum over m is of the diagonal ele-
ments of the matrix for ρQ in the basis {|n⟩}. Box 6.3 derives two important
properties of the trace operator.
Equation (6.64) deﬁnes the density operator in terms of the basis {|n⟩}.
What do we get if we express ρ in terms of some other basis {|qj⟩}? To ﬁnd
out we replace |n⟩by P
j⟨qj|n⟩|qj⟩and obtain
ρ =
X
njk
pn⟨qj|n⟩⟨n|qk⟩|qj⟩⟨qk|
=
X
jk
pjk|qj⟩⟨qk|
where
pjk ≡
X
n
pn⟨qj|n⟩⟨n|qk⟩.
(6.68)
This equation shows that whereas ρ is represented by a diagonal matrix in
the {|n⟩} basis, in the {|qj⟩} basis ρ is represented by a non-diagonal matrix.
This contrast arises because in writing equation (6.64) we assumed that our
system was in one of the states of the set {|n⟩}, although we were unsure


124
Chapter 6: Composite systems
which one. In general if the system is in one of these states, it will deﬁnitely
not be in any of the states {|qj⟩} because each |n⟩will be a non-trivial
linear combination of kets |qj⟩. Thus when ρ is expanded in this basis, the
expansion does not simply specify a probability to be in each state. Instead
it includes complex oﬀ-diagonal terms pjk = P
n pn⟨qj|n⟩⟨n|qk⟩that have no
classical interpretation. When we have incomplete knowledge of the state of
our system, we will generally not know that the system is in some state of a
given complete set, so we should not assume that the oﬀ-diagonal elements of
ρ vanish. Never the less, we may safely use equation (6.64) because whatever
matrix represents ρ in a given basis, ρ is a Hermitian operator and will have
a complete set of eigenkets.
Equation (6.64) gives the expansion of ρ in
terms of its eigenkets. In practical applications we may not know what the
eigenkets |n⟩are, but this need not prevent us using them in calculations.
The importance of ρ is that through equation (6.67) we can obtain from
it the expectation value of any observable. As the system evolves, these ob-
servables will evolve because ρ evolves. To ﬁnd its equation of motion, we
diﬀerentiate equation (6.64) with respect to time and use the tdse. The
diﬀerentiation is straightforward because pn is time-independent: if the sys-
tem was in the state |n⟩at time t, at any later time it will certainly be in
whatever state |n⟩evolves into. Hence we have
dρ
dt =
X
n
pn
∂|n⟩
∂t ⟨n| + |n⟩∂⟨n|
∂t

= 1
i¯h
X
n
pn (H|n⟩⟨n| −|n⟩⟨n|H) = 1
i¯h(Hρ −ρH).
(6.69)
This equation of motion can be written more simply
i¯hdρ
dt = [H, ρ].
(6.70)
To obtain the equation of motion of an arbitrary expectation value Q =
Tr(ρQ), we expand the trace in terms of a time-independent basis {|a⟩} and
use equation (6.70):
i¯hdQ
dt = i¯h
X
a
⟨a|dρ
dt Q|a⟩=
X
a
⟨a|(Hρ −ρH)Q|a⟩= Tr(ρ[Q, H]),
(6.71)
where the last equality uses equation (3) of Box 6.3. Ehrenfest’s theorem
(2.34) states that the rate of change of the expectation value Q for a given
quantum state is the expectation value of [Q, H] divided by i¯h, so equation
(6.71) states that when the quantum state is uncertain, the expected rate of
change of Q is the appropriately weighted average of the rates of change of
Q for each of the possible states of the system.
Notice that the density operator and the operators for the Hamiltonian
and other observables encapsulate a complete, self-contained theory of dy-
namics. If we have incomplete knowledge of our system’s initial state, use
of this theory is mandatory. If we do know the initial state, we can still use
this apparatus by assigning our system the density operator
ρ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ|
(6.72)
rather than using the tdse and extracting amplitudes for possible outcomes
of measurements. However, when ρ takes the special form (6.72), the use of
the density operator becomes optional (Problem 6.8).


6.3 Density operator
125
6.3.1 Reduced density operators
We have seen that any physical interaction between two quantum systems
is likely to entangle them.
No man is an island and no system is truly
isolated (except perhaps the entire Universe!) Consequently, a real system
is constantly entangling itself with its environment. We now show that even
if our system starts in a pure state, once it has entangled itself with its
environment, it will be in an impure state.
We consider a system that is comprised of two subsystems: A, which
will represent our system, and B, which will represent the environment –
the environment consists of anything that is dynamically coupled to our
system but not observed in suﬃcient detail for its dynamics to be followed.
Let the density operator of the entire system be
ρAB =
X
ijkl
|A; i⟩|B; j⟩ρijkl⟨A; k|⟨B; l|.
(6.73)
Let Q be an observable property of subsystem A. The expectation value of
Q is
Q = Tr Qρ
=
X
mn
⟨A; m|⟨B; n|Q

X
ijkl
|A; i⟩|B; j⟩ρijkl⟨A; k|⟨B; l|

|A; m⟩|B; n⟩
=
X
mi
⟨A; m|Q|A; i⟩
X
n
ρinmn,
(6.74)
where the second equality exploits the fact that Q operates only on the
states of subsystem A, and also uses the orthonormality of the states of each
subsystem: ⟨A; k|A; m⟩= δkm, etc. We now deﬁne the reduced density
operator of subsystem A to be
ρA ≡
X
n
⟨B; n|ρAB|B; n⟩=
X
im
|A; i⟩
 X
n
ρinkn
!
⟨A; k|,
(6.75)
where the second equality uses equation (6.73).
In terms of the reduced
density operator, equation (6.74) can be written
Q =
X
m
⟨A; m|QρA|A; m⟩= Tr QρA.
(6.76)
Thus the reduced density operator enables us to obtain expectation values of
subsystem A’s observables without bothering about the states of subsystem
B. It is formed from the density operator of the entire system by taking the
partial trace over the states of subsystem B (eq. 6.75).
Suppose both subsystems start in well-deﬁned states. Then under the
tdse the composite system will evolve through a series of pure states |ψ, t⟩,
and at time t the density operator of the composite system will be (cf. 6.72)
ρAB = |ψ, t⟩⟨ψ, t|.
(6.77)
If the two subsystems have not become entangled, so |ψ, t⟩= |A, t⟩|B, t⟩,
then the reduced density operator for A is
ρA = |A, t⟩⟨A, t|
X
i
⟨B; i|B, t⟩⟨B, t|B; i⟩= |A, t⟩⟨A, t|,
(6.78)
where we have used the fact that the set {|B; i⟩} is a complete set of states for
subsystem B. Equation (6.78) shows that so long as the subsystems remain
unentangled, the reduced density operator for A has the form expected for


126
Chapter 6: Composite systems
a system that is in a pure state. To show that entanglement will generally
lead subsystem A into an impure state, we consider the simplest non-trivial
example: that in which both subsystems are qubits.
Suppose they have
evolved into the entangled state
|ψ, t⟩=
1
√2 (|A; 0⟩|B; 0⟩+ |A; 1⟩|B; 1⟩)
(6.79)
Then evaluating the trace over the two states of B we ﬁnd
ρA = 1
2⟨B; 0| (|A; 0⟩|B; 0⟩+ |A; 1⟩|B; 1⟩) (⟨A; 0|⟨B; 0| + ⟨A; 1|⟨B; 1|) |B; 0⟩
+ 1
2⟨B; 1| (|A; 0⟩|B; 0⟩+ |A; 1⟩|B; 1⟩) (⟨A; 0|⟨B; 0| + ⟨A; 1|⟨B; 1|) |B; 1⟩
= 1
2 (|A; 0⟩⟨A; 0| + |A; 1⟩⟨A; 1|) ,
(6.80)
which is the density operator of a very impure state. Physically this result
makes perfect sense: in equation (6.80) ρA states that subsystem A has
equal probability of being in either |0⟩or |1⟩, which is consistent with the
state (6.79) of the entire system. In that state these two possibilities were
associated with distinct predictions about the state of subsystem B, but
in passing from ρAB to ρA we have lost track of these correlations: if we
choose to consider system A in isolation, we lose the information carried
by these correlations, with the result that we have incomplete information
about system A. In this case system A is in an impure state. So long as we
recognise that A is part of the larger system AB and we retain the ability
to measure both parts of AB, we have complete information, so AB is in a
pure state.
In this example system A represents the system under study and system
B represents the environment of A, which we deﬁned to be whatever is dy-
namically coupled to A but incompletely instrumented. If, for example, A is
a hydrogen atom, then the electromagnetic ﬁeld inside the vessel containing
the atom would form part of B because a hydrogen atom, being comprised
of two moving charged particles, is inevitably coupled to the electromagnetic
ﬁeld. If we start with the atom in its ﬁrst excited state and the electro-
magnetic ﬁeld in its ground state, then atom, ﬁeld and atom-plus-ﬁeld are
initially all in pure states. After some time the atom-plus-ﬁeld will evolve
into the state
|ψ, t⟩= a0(t)|A; 0⟩|F; 1⟩+ a1(t)|A; 1⟩|F; 0⟩,
(6.81)
where |A; n⟩is the nth excited state of the atom, while |F; n⟩is the state of
the electromagnetic ﬁeld when it contains n photons of the frequency asso-
ciated with transitions between the atom’s ground and ﬁrst-excited states.
In equation (6.81), a0(t) is the amplitude that the atom has decayed to its
ground state while a1(t) is the amplitude that it is still in its excited state.
When neither amplitude vanishes, the atom is entangled with the electro-
magnetic ﬁeld. If we fail to monitor the electromagnetic ﬁeld, we have to
describe the atom by its reduced density operator
ρA = |a0|2|A; 0⟩⟨A; 0| + |a1|2|A; 1⟩⟨A; 1|.
(6.82)
This density operator indicates that the atom is now in an impure state.
In practice a system under study will sooner or later become entangled
with its environment, and once it has, we will be obliged to treat the system
as one for which we lack complete information. That is, we will have to
predict the results of measurements with a non-trivial density operator. The
transition of systems in this way from pure states to impure ones is called
quantum decoherence. Experimental work directed at realising the possi-
bilities oﬀered by quantum computing is very much concerned with arresting
the decoherence process by weakening all couplings to the environment.


6.3 Density operator
127
6.3.2 Shannon entropy
Once we recognise that systems are typically in impure states, it’s natural
to want to quantify the impurity of a state: for example, if in the deﬁnition
(6.64) of the density operator, p3 = 0.99999999, then the system is almost
certain to be found in the state |3⟩and predictions made by assuming that
the system is in the pure state |3⟩will not be much in error, while if the
largest probability occurring in the sum is 10−20, the eﬀects of impurity will
be enormous.
A probability distribution {pi} provides a certain amount of information
about the outcome of some investigation. If one probability is close to unity,
the information it provides is nearly complete. Conversely, if all the probabil-
ities are small, no outcome is particularly likely and the missing information
is large. The question we now address is “what is the appropriate measure
of the missing information that remains after a probability distribution {pi}
has been speciﬁed?”
Logic dictates that the required measure s(p1, . . . , pn) of missing infor-
mation must have the following properties:
• s must be a continuous, symmetric function of the pi;
• s should be largest when every outcome is equally likely, i.e., when
pi = 1/n for all i. We deﬁne
s( 1
n, . . . , 1
n) = sn
(6.83)
and require that sn+1 > sn (more possibilities implies more missing
information).
• s shall be consistent in the sense that it yields the same missing informa-
tion when there are diﬀerent ways of enumerating the possible outcomes
of the event.
To grasp the essence of the last requirement, consider an experiment with
three possible outcomes x1, x2 and x3 to which we assign probabilities p1, p2
and p3, yielding missing information s(p1, p2, p3). We could group the last
two outcomes together into the outcome x23, by which we mean “either x2
or x3”. Then we assign a probability p23 = p2 + p3 to getting x23, giving
missing information s(p1, p23). To this missing information we have to add
that associated with resolving the outcome x23 into either x2 or x3. The
probability that we will have to resolve this missing information is p23, and
the probability of getting x2 given that we have x23 is p2/p23, so we argue
that
s(p1, p2, p3) = s(p1, p23) + p23s
 p2
p23
, p3
p23

.
(6.84)
This equation is readily generalised: we have n possible outcomes x1, . . . , xn
with probabilities p1, . . . , pn. We gather the outcomes into r groups and let
y1 be the outcome in which one of x1, . . . , xk1 was obtained, y2 the outcome in
which one of xk1+1 . . . , xk2 was obtained etc, and let wi denote the probability
of the outcome yi. Then since the probability that we get x1 given that we
have already obtained y1 is p1/w1, we have
s(p1, . . . , pn) = s(w1, . . . , wr) + w1s(p1/w1, . . . , pk1/w1)+
· · · + wrs(pn−kr/wr, . . . , pn/wr).
(6.85)
Since s is a continuous function of its arguments, it suﬃces to evaluate
it for rational values of the arguments. So we assume that there are integers
ni such that pi = ni/N, where P
i ni = N by the requirement that the
probabilities sum to unity. Consider a system in which there are N equally
likely outcomes, and from these form n groups, with ni possibilities in the
ith group. Then the probability of the group is pi and the probability of
getting any possibility in the ith group given that the ith group has come up,
is 1/ni. Hence applying equation (6.85) to the whole system we ﬁnd
s(1/N, . . . , 1/N) = s(p1, . . . , pn) +
n
X
i
pis(1/ni, . . . , 1/ni)
(6.86)


128
Chapter 6: Composite systems
Box 6.4:
Solving Equation (6.88)
Let s(n) ≡sn. Then equation (6.88) is easily extended to
s(mnr · · ·) = s(n) + s(m) + s(r) + · · · ,
so with n = m = r = · · · we conclude that
s(nk) = ks(n).
Now let u, v be any two integers bigger than 1. Then for arbitrarily large
n we can ﬁnd m such that
m
n ≤ln v
ln u < m + 1
n
⇒
um ≤vn < um+1.
(1)
Since s is monotone increasing,
s(um) ≤s(vn) < s(um+1)
⇒
ms(u) ≤ns(v) < (m + 1)s(u)
⇒
m
n ≤s(v)
s(u) < m + 1
n
.
(2)
Comparing equation (1) with equation (2), we see that

s(v)
s(u) −ln v
ln u
 ≤1
n
⇒

s(v)
ln v −s(u)
ln u
 ≤ǫ,
where ǫ = s(u)/(n ln v) is arbitrary small. Thus we have shown that
s(v) ∝ln v.
or with the deﬁnition (6.83) of sn,
s(p1, . . . , pn) = sN −
n
X
i
pisni

N =
n
X
i
ni

.
(6.87)
This equation relates s evaluated on a general argument list to the values
that s takes when all its arguments are equal. Setting all the ni = m we
obtain a relation that involves only sn:
sn = snm −sm.
(6.88)
It is easy to check that this functional equation is solved by sn = K ln n,
where K is an arbitrary constant that we can set to unity. In fact, in Box 6.4
it is shown that this is the only monotone solution of equation (6.88). Hence
from equation (6.87) we have that the unique measure of missing information
is
s(p1, . . . , pn) = ln N −
n
X
i
pi ln ni = −
X
i
pi(ln ni −ln N)
= −
X
i
pi ln pi.
(6.89)
Since every probability pi is non-negative and less than or equal to one, s is
inherently positive. Claude Shannon (1916–2001) ﬁrst demonstrated11 that
the function (6.89) is the only consistent measure of missing information.
Since s(p) turns out to be intimately connected to thermodynamic entropy,
it is called the Shannon entropy of the probability distribution.
The Shannon entropy of a density operator ρ is deﬁned to be
s(ρ) = −Tr ρ ln ρ.
(6.90)
11 C.E. Shannon, Bell Systems Technical Journal, 27, 379 (1948). For a much fuller
account, see E.T. Jaynes Probability Theory: the Logic of Science Cambridge University
Press, 2003.


6.4 Thermodynamics
129
The right side of this expression involves a function, ln(x) of the operator
ρ. We recall from equation (2.20) that f(ρ) has the same eigenkets as ρ and
eigenvalues f(λi), where λi are the eigenvalues of ρ. Hence
s = −Tr(ρ ln ρ) = −
X
n
⟨n|
X
i
pi|i⟩⟨i|
X
j
ln(pj)|j⟩⟨j|n⟩= −
X
n
pn ln pn.
(6.91)
Hence s is simply the Shannon entropy of the probability distribution {pi}
that appears in the deﬁnition (6.64) of ρ.
6.4 Thermodynamics
Thermodynamics is concerned with macroscopic systems about which we
don’t know very much, certainly vastly less than is required to deﬁne a
quantum state.
For example, the system might consist of a cylinder full
of ﬂuid and our knowledge be conﬁned to the chemical nature of the ﬂuid
(that it is O2 or CO2, or whatever), the mass of ﬂuid, its volume and the
temperature of the environment with which it is in equilibrium.
In the
canonical picture we consider that as a result of exchanges of energy with
the environment, the energy of the ﬂuid ﬂuctuates around a mean U. The
pressure also ﬂuctuates around a mean value P, but the volume V is well-
deﬁned and under our control.
Thermodynamics applies to systems that are more complex than bodies
of ﬂuid, for example to a quantity of diamond. In such a case the stress in the
material is not fully described by the pressure, and thermodynamic relations
involve also the shear stress and the shear strain within the crystal. If the
crystal, like quartz, has interesting electrical properties, the thermodynamic
relations will involve the electric ﬁeld within the material and the polarisation
that it induces. A ﬂuid is the simplest non-trivial thermodynamic system and
therefore the focus of introductory texts, but the principles that it illuminates
are of much wider validity. For simplicity we restrict our discussion to ﬂuids.
To obtain relations between the thermodynamic variables from a knowl-
edge of the system’s microstructure, we need to assign a probability pi to
each of the system’s zillions of quantum states. We argue that the only ratio-
nal way to assign probabilities to the stationary states of a thermodynamic
system is to choose them such that (i) they reproduce any measurements
we have of the system, and (ii) they maximise the Shannon entropy. Re-
quirement (ii) follows because in choosing the {pi} we must not specify any
information beyond that included when we satisfy requirement (i) – our prob-
abilities must “tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth”.
It is straightforward to show (Problem 6.16) that the pi that maximise the
Shannon entropy for given internal energy
U ≡
X
stationary
states i
Eipi
(6.92)
are given by
pi = 1
Z e−βEi,
(6.93a)
where β ≡1/(kBT ) is the inverse temperature and
Z ≡
X
stationary
states i
e−βEi.
(6.93b)
The quantity Z deﬁned above is called the partition function; it is man-
ifestly a function of T and less obviously a function of the volume V and
whatever other parameters deﬁne the spectrum {Ei} of the Hamiltonian. In


130
Chapter 6: Composite systems
equation (6.93a) its role is clearly to ensure that the probabilities satisfy the
normalisation condition P
i pi = 1.
Since the probability distribution (6.93a) maximises the Shannon en-
tropy for given internal energy, we take the density operator of a thermody-
namic system to be diagonal in the energy representation and to be given
by
ρ = 1
Z
X
stationary
states i
e−βEi|i⟩⟨i|.
(6.94)
This form of the density operator is called the Gibbs distribution in honour
of J.W. Gibbs (1839–1903), who died before quantum mechanics emerged but
had already established that probabilities should given by equation (6.93a).
The sum in equation (6.94) is over quantum states not energy levels. It
is likely that many energy levels will be highly degenerate and in this case
the sum simpliﬁes to Z = P
α gαe−βEα, where α runs over energy levels and
gα is the number of linearly independent quantum states in level α.
The expectation of the Hamiltonian of a thermodynamic system is
H = Tr(Hρ) =
X
n
⟨n|H
X
i
pi|i⟩⟨i|n⟩=
X
n
pnEn = U,
(6.95)
where we have used the deﬁnition (6.92) of the internal energy. Thus the
internal energy U of thermodynamics is simply the expectation value of the
system’s Hamiltonian. Another important expression for U follows straight-
forwardly from equations (6.92) and (6.93):
U = −∂ln Z
∂β
.
(6.96)
We obtain an interesting equation using equation (6.93a) to eliminate
the second occurrence of pn from the extreme right of equation (6.91):
s = −
X
n
pn(−βEn −ln Z) = βU + ln Z.
(6.97)
In terms of the thermodynamic entropy
S ≡kBs
(6.98)
and the Helmholtz free energy
F ≡−kBT ln Z
(6.99)
equation (6.97) can be written
F = U −T S,
(6.100)
which in classical thermodynamics is considered to be the deﬁnition of the
Helmholtz free energy. When we substitute our deﬁnition of F into equation
(6.96), we obtain
U = ∂(βF)
∂β
= F + β ∂F
∂β = F −T ∂F
∂T .
(6.101)
Comparing this equation with equation (6.100) we conclude that
S = −∂F
∂T .
(6.102)
The diﬀerence of equation (6.92) between two similar thermodynamic
states is
dU =
X
i
(dpiEi + pidEi).
(6.103)


6.4 Thermodynamics
131
Similarly diﬀerencing the deﬁnition S = −kB
P
i pi ln pi of the thermody-
namic entropy (eqns 6.91 and 6.98), we obtain
dS = −kB
X
i
(ln pi + 1) dpi = −kB
X
i
ln pi dpi,
(6.104)
where the second equality exploits the fact that {pi} is a probability distri-
bution so P
i pi = 1 always. By equation (6.93a), ln pi = −Ei/(kBT ) −ln Z,
so again using P
i pi = 1, equation (6.104) can be rewritten
T dS =
X
i
Eidpi.
(6.105)
If we heat our system up at constant volume, the Ei stay the same but the
pi change because they depend on T . In these circumstances the increase in
internal energy, P
i Eidpi, is the heat absorbed by the system. Consequently,
equation (6.105) states that T dS is the heat absorbed when the system is
heated with no work done. This statement coincides with the deﬁnition of
entropy in classical thermodynamics.
Substituting equation (6.105) into equation (6.103) yields
dU = T dS −PdV,
(6.106a)
where
P ≡−
X
i
pi
∂Ei
∂V .
(6.106b)
If we isolate our system from heat sources and then slowly change its vol-
ume, the adiabatic principle (§11.1) tells us that the system will stay in
whatever stationary state it started in. That is, the pi will be constant while
the volume of the thermally isolated system is slowly changed. In classical
thermodynamics this is an ‘adiabatic’ change. From equation (6.104) we see
that the entropy S is constant during an adiabatic change, just as classical
thermodynamics teaches.
Since dS = 0 in an adiabatic change, the change in U as V is varied
must be the mechanical work done on the system, −PdV, where P is the
pressure the system exerts. This argument establishes that the quantity P
deﬁned by (6.106b) is the pressure.
Diﬀerentiating equation (6.100) for the Helmholtz free energy and using
equation (6.106a) to eliminate dU, we ﬁnd that
dF = −SdT −PdV.
(6.107)
From this it immediately follows that
S = −
∂F
∂T

V
;
P = −
∂F
∂V

T
.
(6.108)
The ﬁrst of these equations was obtained above but the second one is new.
Equation (6.106a) is the central equation of thermodynamics since it
embodies both the ﬁrst and second laws of thermodynamics. This result es-
tablishes that classical thermodynamics is a consequence of applying quan-
tum mechanics to systems of which we know very little. Remarkably, physi-
cists working in the ﬁrst half of the 19th century discovered thermodynamics
long before quantum mechanics was thought of, using extremely subtle argu-
ments concerning heat engines. Quantum mechanics makes these arguments
redundant. Notwithstanding this redundancy, they continue to feature in un-
dergraduate syllabuses the world over because they are beautiful. But then
so are copperplate writing and slide rules, which have rightly disappeared
from schools.


132
Chapter 6: Composite systems
A possible explanation for the survival of thermodynamics as an in-
dependent discipline is as follows.
Equations (6.99), (6.100) and (6.108)
establish that any thermodynamic quantity can be obtained from the depen-
dence of the partition function on T and V . Unfortunately, this dependence
can be calculated for only a very few Hamiltonians. In almost all practical
cases we cannot proceed by evaluating Z. However, once we know that Z
and therefore F and S exist, we can determine their functional forms from
experimental data. For example, by measuring the heat released on cooling
our system at constant volume to absolute zero, we can determine its entropy
S =
R
dQ/T . Similarly, we can measure the system’s pressure as a function
of T and V. Then by integrating equation (6.107) we can obtain F(T, V)
and thus infer Z(T, V). In none of these operations is the involvement of
quantum mechanics apparent, so engineers and chemists, who make exten-
sive use of thermodynamics, are generally unaware that it is a consequence of
quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics provides us with relations between
thermodynamics quantities but does not enable us to evaluate the quantities
themselves. Evaluation must still be done with 19th century technology.
Although thermodynamics systems are inherently macroscopic, quan-
tum mechanics plays a central role in determining their thermodynamic
quantities because it deﬁnes the stationary states we have to sum over in
(6.93b) to form the partition function. Before quantum mechanics was born,
the thermodynamic properties of an ideal gas – one composed of molecules
that occupy negligible volume and interact only at very short range – were
obtained by summing over the phase-space locations of each molecule inde-
pendently. In this procedure there are six distinct states of a three-molecule
gas in which there are molecules at the phase-space locations x1, x2 and x3:
in one state molecule 1 is at x1, molecule 2 is at x2 and molecule 3 is at
x3, and a distinct state is obtained by swapping the locations of molecule
1 and molecule 2, and so forth. Quantum mechanics teaches that the state
of the gas is completely speciﬁed by listing the three occupied states, |1⟩,
|2⟩and |3⟩for it is meaningless to say which molecule is in which state.
The classical way of counting states leads to absurd results even for gases at
room temperature (Problem 6.22). At low-temperatures another aspect of
classical physics leads to erroneous results: the low-lying energy levels of a
gas are distributed discretely rather than continuously in E, with the result
that speciﬁc heats always vanish in the limit T →0 (Nernst’s theorem;
Problem 6.23), contrary to the prediction of classical physics.
An important lesson to be learnt from the failure of classical physics to
predict the properties of an ideal gas is the importance in quantum mechan-
ics of thinking wholistically: we have to sum over the quantum states of the
whole cylinder of gas, not over the states of individual molecules. This is
analogous to the importance for understanding EPR phenomena of consid-
ering the quantum system formed by the entangled particles taken together.
In quantum mechanics the whole is generally very much more than the sum
of its parts because there are non-trivial correlations between the parts.12
6.5 Measurement
In §1.4 we asserted that the state of a system ‘collapses’ into one of the
eigenstates |qj⟩of the operator Q the instant we measure the observable Q.
Consequently, the result of measuring Q is to leave the system in the well-
deﬁned quantum state |qj⟩. It’s time to examine this collapse hypothesis
critically.
Superﬁcially the collapse hypothesis is merely an assertion that mea-
surements are reproducible in the sense that if we measure something twice
in quick succession, we will obtain the same result: in §2.1 |qj⟩was deﬁned
12 The origin of these correlations is the subject of §10.1.


6.5 Measurement
133
to be the state in which measurement of Q was certain to yield the value
qj, so if the measurement of Q is to be reproducible, the system has to be
in the state |qj⟩immediately after the measurement. However, our system’s
quantum state |ψ⟩is supposed to describe the system’s real, physical state,
not just our knowledge of it. So something physical must have happened to
make |ψ⟩shift from the value it had before the measurement to the state
|qj⟩̸ = |ψ⟩that it had just after the measurement was completed. Notice that
the evolution from |ψ⟩to |qj⟩has not been derived from the tdse, which we
have stated to be the equation that governs the time-evolution of |ψ⟩. So
this Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics implies that every
measurement leads to a momentary suspension of the equations of motion,
so the system can be steered, by forces unspeciﬁed, into a randomly chosen
state! This is not serious physics. We need to consider more realistically
what is involved in making a measurement.
A ﬁrst step from Copenhagen towards the real world can be taken by
recognising that since real measurements are associated with error bars, they
will not leave the system in a state in which the result of a subsequent
measurement is certain.
It follows that a real measurement of Q will in
general not leave the system in one of the states |qi⟩in which the result of a
subsequent measurement is certain. That is, the collapse hypothesis is false.
The Copenhagen interpretation does, however, contain a crucial insight
into measurement by stressing that any measurement physically disturbs the
system, so the system’s state after a measurement has been made is diﬀerent
from what it was earlier. In classical physics we may or may not have to
worry about the disturbance of the system by the measuring process – for
example, when we measure the positions of Jupiter’s moons by pointing a
telescope at them, we don’t need to worry about disturbance caused by mea-
surement. But when we measure the voltage across a resistor by connecting
a galvanometer in parallel with it, we change the voltage by increasing the
current through the circuit either side of the resistor. We minimise this dis-
turbance by buying a galvanometer with the highest aﬀordable impedance,
and we estimate the magnitude of the eﬀect and try to correct for it. When
measurements are made on systems small enough for quantum mechanics
to be relevant, the system will be signiﬁcantly disturbed because we cannot
make instruments of arbitrary sensitivity – quantum mechanics itself makes
this impossible.
So the Copenhagen interpretation is right to stress that
post- and pre-measurement states are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent.
Where the Copenhagen interpretation slips up is in supposing that the
disturbance caused by a measurement can be taken into account without
knowing anything about the measuring instrument that was used. Physically
it is obvious that since the disturbance is caused by the instrument, we
cannot hope to predict the evolution of the system without knowledge of the
physical principles on which the instrument works, and the conﬁguration it
was in when the measuring process started. In fact, it’s astonishing that
useful predictions can be extracted from a theory that fails to engage with
these key questions!
The Copenhagen interpretation makes progress through two stratagems.
First it assumes that the builder of the measuring instrument has been clever
enough to make an instrument that makes essentially reproducible measure-
ments. This being so, the state in which the measuring instrument leaves
the system must be one of the eigenstates of the observable’s operator. Fo-
cusing on instruments that measure reproducibly is a shrewd move because
instruments that do not yield reproducible readings are regarded as ‘noisy’
and tend not to be used. So the Copenhagen interpretation does make an
assumption about the nature of the measuring instrument – that it is a good
one, so it steers the system’s state to one of the |qi⟩– and gets by without
considering the detailed physics that actually does the steering. By declin-
ing to consider the physics of the instrument, the theory remains general and
able to produce results that apply to any instrument rather than a particular
brand of electrometer, or whatever.


134
Chapter 6: Composite systems
The second stratagem is to abandon causality and assert that the out-
come of a measurement is inherently uncertain. It merely supplies probabili-
ties of the various measurement outcomes. So while a diﬀerential equation is
supplied with which to calculate with precision the evolution of the system’s
state between measurements, the consequences of measurement are left to
blind chance. This stratagem circumvents the failure to consider fully the
nature of the measuring equipment, for (as we shall argue) it is the unknown
state of this equipment at the start of the measuring process that makes the
outcome of the measurement uncertain.
A key insight of the Copenhagen interpretation is that the states in
which the outcome of measuring one observable is certain are generally dif-
ferent from the states in which the outcome of measuring a diﬀerent observ-
able is certain. That is, there are fundamentally incompatible observables
in the sense that if you are certain what value you will measure for one ob-
servable, you cannot be certain what value you will measure for the other
observable.
Since the states in which the outcomes of measurements are
the eigenkets of an observable’s operator, and operators that do not have a
complete set of mutual eigenkets do not commute, incompatible observables
have non-commuting operators. There is nothing deeply mysterious about
incompatible observables – it just happens that the act of measuring one
observable drives the system into diﬀerent states from those into which the
system is driven by measuring the other observable. The key thing is to be
clear that an observable is not an intrinsic property of the system, but a
question we can ask of it. In general my particle has neither a position nor
a momentum, but these are questions I can ask of it, and after the question
has been asked, the particle will be (temporarily) in a special state that does
have a well-deﬁned position / momentum.
The probabilistic outcome of a measurement introduces to physics a
new feature of great consequence: irreversibility. After a measurement, it is
impossible to determine what the state of the system was before the mea-
surement was made. This is so because many diﬀerent initial states of the
system are consistent with measuring a particular value of the observable Q,
and therefore causing the system to ﬁnish in a given state |qi⟩.
An instrument is itself a dynamical system, and its dynamics is governed
by quantum mechanics. We make a measurement by putting the instrument
‘into contact’ with our system – that is, we ensure that the instrument and
the system are dynamically coupled by a non-negligible Hamiltonian. Once
in contact, the instrument and our system together form a composite system,
and, like all dynamically coupled subsystems, they soon become entangled.
That is, the state of the instrument becomes correlated with that of the
system. It is as a consequence of this entanglement that the instrument is
able to show a reading that reﬂects the state of the system being measured.
The instrument must be suﬃciently macroscopic that it can be read
by a human being – if it were microscopic, an instrument would be needed
to measure it, and so on until eventually the macroscopic scale is reached.
That is, an instrument that is not macroscopic can be considered part of the
quantum system being studied and evolved with the tdse; if a measurement
is to be made, at some point the entire quantum system has to interact
with a macroscopic instrument. Anything macroscopic will be in an impure
state (§6.3). Consequently, once interaction with a macroscopic instrument
is established, the outcome of the experiment will be probabilistic, just as
the Copenhagen interpretation asserts.
A measurement will also be irreversible in the sense that one cannot
compute the state that the system was in prior to the interaction because
such a computation would require for the initial conditions complete knowl-
edge of the instrument’s state after the measurement.
This discussion shows that the collapse hypothesis is really a clever way
to circumvent our unwillingness to follow the dynamics of system/instrument
interaction. The failure to follow the interaction enables the theory to make


Problems
135
general statements that are valid irrespective of which devices are actually
used for measurement, but in speciﬁc cases it should be possible to obtain
a more complete understanding by properly considering the dynamics of
the measuring instrument. Unfortunately, we probably need an extension
to quantum mechanics to take this step, because a conventional quantum-
mechanical theory of the measuring instrument will require us at some point
to ‘observe’ the instrument using the collapse hypothesis, from which we are
trying to escape: quantum mechanics is a theoretical arena from which the
only exit to the real world is through the turnstile of the collapse hypothesis.
We expect any extension of quantum mechanics that successfully in-
cludes the act of measurement to be formulated in terms of density opera-
tors, because incomplete knowledge of the state of our instruments certainly
makes a major contribution to the uncertain outcome of measurements, and
may be entirely responsible for it.
Problems
6.1
A system AB consists of two non-interacting parts A and B. The dy-
namical state of A is described by |a⟩, and that of B by |b⟩, so |a⟩satisﬁes the
tdse for A and similarly for |b⟩. What is the ket describing the dynamical
state of AB? In terms of the Hamiltonians HA and HB of the subsystems,
write down the tdse for the evolution of this ket and show that it is au-
tomatically satisﬁed. Do HA and HB commute? How is the tdse changed
when the subsystems are coupled by a small dynamical interaction Hint?
If A and B are harmonic oscillators, write down HA, HB. The oscillating
particles are connected by a weak spring. Write down the appropriate form
of the interaction Hamiltonian Hint. Does HA commute with Hint? Explain
the physical signiﬁcance of your answer.
6.2
Explain what is implied by the statement that “the physical state of
system A is correlated with the state of system B.” Illustrate your answer
by considering the momenta of cars on (i) London’s circular motorway (the
M25) at rush-hour, and (ii) the road over the Nullarbor Plain in southern
Australia in the dead of night.
Explain why the states of A and B must be uncorrelated if it is possible
to write the state of AB as a ket |AB; ψ⟩= |A; ψ1⟩|B; ψ2⟩that is a product
of states of A and B. Given a complete set of states for A, {|A; i⟩} and a
corresponding complete set of states for B, {|B; i⟩}, write down an expression
for a state of AB in which B is possibly correlated with A.
6.3
Given that the state |AB⟩of a compound system can be written as
a product |A⟩|B⟩of states of the individual systems, show that when |AB⟩
is written as P
ij cij|A; i⟩|B; j⟩in terms of arbitrary basis vectors for the
subsystems, every column of the matrix cij is a multiple of the leftmost
column.
6.4
Consider a system of two particles of mass m that each move in one
dimension along a given rod. Let |1; x⟩be the state of the ﬁrst particle when
it’s at x and |2; y⟩be the state of the second particle when it’s at y.
A
complete set of states of the pair of particles is {|xy⟩} = {|1; x⟩|2; y⟩}. Write
down the Hamiltonian of this system given that the particles attract one
another with a force that’s equal to C times their separation.
Suppose the particles experience an additional potential
V (x, y) = 1
2C(x + y)2.
(6.109)
Show that the dynamics of the two particles is now identical with the dynam-
ics of a single particle that moves in two dimensions in a particular potential
Φ(x, y), and give the form of Φ.


136
Problems
6.5
In §6.1.4 we derived Bell’s inequality by considering measurements by
Alice and Bob on an entangled electron-positron pair. Bob measures the
component of spin along an axis that is inclined by angle θ to that used by
Alice. Given the expression
|−, b⟩= cos(θ/2) eiφ/2|−⟩−sin(θ/2) e−iφ/2|+⟩,
(6.110)
for the state of a spin-half particle in which it has spin −1
2 along the direction
b with polar angles (θ, φ), with |±⟩the states in which there is spin ± 1
2 along
the z-axis, calculate the amplitude AB(−|A+) that Bob ﬁnds the positron’s
spin to be −1
2 given that Alice has found + 1
2 for the electron’s spin. Hence
show that PB(−|A+) = cos2(θ/2).
6.6
Show that when the Hadamard operator UH is applied to every qubit
of an n-qubit register that is initially in a member |m⟩of the computational
basis, the resulting state is
|ψ⟩=
1
2n/2
2n−1
X
x=0
ax|x⟩,
(6.111)
where ax = 1 for all x if m = 0, but exactly half the ax = 1 and the other
half the ax = −1 for any other choice of m. Hence show that
1
2n/2 UH
X
x
ax|x⟩=

|0⟩
if all ax = 1
|m⟩̸ = |0⟩
if half the ax = 1 and the other ax = −1.
(6.112)
6.7
Show that the trace of every Hermitian operator is real.
6.8
Let ρ be the density operator of a two-state system. Explain why ρ
can be assumed to have the matrix representation
ρ =

a
c
c∗
b

,
(6.113)
where a and b are real numbers. Let E0 and E1 > E0 be the eigenenergies of
this system and |0⟩and |1⟩the corresponding stationary states. Show from
the equation of motion of ρ that in the energy representation a and b are
time-independent while c(t) = c(0)eiωt with ω = (E1 −E0)/¯h.
Determine the values of a, b and c(t) for the case that initially the system
is in the state |ψ⟩= (|0⟩+ |1⟩)/√2. Given that the parities of |0⟩and |1⟩are
even and odd respectively, ﬁnd the time evolution of the expectation value
x in terms of the matrix element ⟨0|x|1⟩. Interpret your result physically.
6.9
In this problem we consider an alternative interpretation of the density
operator. Any quantum state can be expanded in the energy basis as
|ψ; φ⟩≡
N
X
n=1
√pn eiφn|n⟩,
(6.114)
where φn is real and pn is the probability that a measurement of energy will
return En. Suppose we know the values of the pn but not the values of the
phases φn. Then the density operator is
ρ =
Z 2π
0
dNφ
(2π)N |ψ; φ⟩⟨ψ; φ|.
(6.115)
Show that this expression reduces to P
n pn|n⟩⟨n|.
Contrast the physical
assumptions made in this derivation of ρ with those made in §6.3.
Clearly |ψ; φ⟩can be expanded in some other basis {|qr⟩} as
|ψ; φ⟩≡
X
r
p
Pr eiηr|qr⟩,
(6.116)
where Pr is the probability of obtaining qr on a measurement of the observ-
able Q and the ηr(φ) are unknown phases. Why does this second expansion
not lead to the erroneous conclusion that ρ is necessarily diagonal in the
{|qr⟩} representation?


Problems
137
6.10
Show that the equation of motion of the density operator ρ is solved
by
ρt = U(t)ρ0U †(t),
(6.117)
where U(t) ≡e−iHt/¯h is the time-evolution operator introduced in §4.3.
6.11∗
Show that when the density operator takes the form ρ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ|,
the expression Q = Tr Qρ for the expectation value of an observable can be
reduced to ⟨ψ|Q|ψ⟩. Explain the physical signiﬁcance of this result. For the
given form of the density operator, show that the equation of motion of ρ
yields
|φ⟩⟨ψ| = |ψ⟩⟨φ|
where
|φ⟩≡i¯h∂|ψ⟩
∂t
−H|ψ⟩.
(6.118)
Show from this equation that |φ⟩= a|ψ⟩, where a is real. Hence determine
the time evolution of |ψ⟩given the at t = 0 |ψ⟩= |E⟩is an eigenket of H.
Explain why ρ does not depend on the phase of |ψ⟩and relate this fact to
the presence of a in your solution for |ψ, t⟩.
6.12
The density operator is deﬁned to be ρ = P
α pα|α⟩⟨α|, where pα
is the probability that the system is in the state α.
Given an arbitrary
basis {|i⟩} and the expansions |α⟩= P
i aαi|i⟩, calculate the matrix elements
ρij = ⟨i|ρ|j⟩of ρ. Show that the diagonal elements ρii are non-negative real
numbers and interpret them as probabilities.
6.13
Consider the density operator ρ = P
ij ρij|i⟩⟨j| of a system that is in
a pure state. Show that every row of the matrix ρij is a multiple of the ﬁrst
row and every column is a multiple of the ﬁrst column. Given that these
relations between the rows and columns of a density matrix hold, show that
the system is in a pure state. Hint: exploit the real, non-negativity of ρ11
established in Problem 6.12 and the Hermiticity of ρ.
6.14
Consider the rate of change of the expectation of the observable Q
when the system is in an impure state. This is
dQ
dt =
X
n
pn
d
dt⟨n|Q|n⟩,
(6.119)
where pn is the probability that the system is in the state |n⟩. By using
Ehrenfest’s theorem to evaluate the derivative on the right of (6.119), derive
the equation of motion i¯hdQ/dt = Tr(ρ[Q, H]).
6.15
Find the probability distribution (p1, . . . , pn) for n possible outcomes
that maximises the Shannon entropy. Hint: use a Lagrange multiplier.
6.16
Use Lagrange multipliers λ and β to extremise the Shannon entropy
of the probability distribution {pi} subject to the constraints (i) P
i pi = 1
and (ii) P
i piEi = U. Explain the physical signiﬁcance of your result.
6.17
Explain why if at t = 0 the density operator of a system is given by
the Gibbs distribution, it remains so at later times.
6.18
A composite system is formed from uncorrelated subsystem A and
subsystem B, both in impure states. The numbers {pAi} are the probabilities
of the members of the complete set of states {|A; i⟩} for subsystem A, while
the numbers {pBi} are the probabilities of the complete set of states {|B; i⟩}
for subsystem B. Show that the Shannon entropy of the composite system is
the sum of the Shannon entropies of its subsystems. What is the relevance
of this result for thermodynamics?
6.19
The |0⟩state of a qubit has energy 0, while the |1⟩state has energy ǫ.
Show that when the qubit is in thermodynamic equilibrium at temperature
T = 1/(kBβ) the internal energy of the qubit is
U =
ǫ
eβǫ + 1.
(6.120)
Show that when βǫ ≪1, U ≃1
2ǫ, while for βǫ ≫1, U ≃ǫe−βǫ. Interpret
these results physically and sketch the speciﬁc heat C = ∂U/∂T as a function
of T .


138
Problems
6.20
Show that the time-evolution of the density operator leaves the Shan-
non entropy s = −Tr ρ log ρ invariant.
6.21
Show that the partition function of a harmonic oscillator of natural
frequency ω is
Zho =
e−β¯hω/2
1 −e−β¯hω .
(6.121)
Hence show that when the oscillator is at temperature T = 1/(kBβ) the
oscillator’s internal energy is
Uho = ¯hω

1
2 +
1
eβ¯hω −1

.
(6.122)
Interpret the factor (eβ¯hω −1)−1 physically.
Show that the speciﬁc heat
C = ∂U/∂T is
C = kB
eβ¯hω
(eβ¯hω −1)2 (β¯hω)2.
(6.123)
Show that lim T→0 C = 0 and obtain a simple expression for C when kBT ≫
¯hω.
6.22
A classical ideal monatomic gas has internal energy U = 3
2NkBT and
pressure P = NkBT/V, where N is the number of molecules and V is the
volume they occupy. From these relations, and assuming that the entropy
vanishes at zero temperature and volume, show that in general the entropy
is
S(T, V) = NkB( 3
2 ln T + ln V).
(6.124)
A removable wall divides a cylinder into equal parts of volume V. Initially
the wall is in place and each half contains N molecules of ideal monatomic
gas at temperature T . The wall is removed. Show that equation (6.124)
implies that the entropy of the entire body of ﬂuid increases by 2 ln 2 NkB.
Can this result be squared with the principle that dS = dQ/T , where dQ is
the heat absorbed when the change is made reversibly? What conclusion do
you draw from this thought experiment?
6.23
Consider a ‘gas’ formed by M non-interacting, monatomic molecules
of mass m that move in a one-dimensional potential well V = 0 for |x| < a
and ∞otherwise. Assume that at suﬃciently low temperatures all molecules
are either in the ground or ﬁrst-excited states. Show that in this approxima-
tion the partition function is given by
ln Z = −MβE0 + e−3βE0 −e−3(M+1)βE0
where
E0 ≡π2¯h2
8ma2 .
(6.125)
Show that for M large the internal energy, pressure and speciﬁc heat of this
gas are given by
U = E0(M + 3e−3βE0) ; P = 2E0
a
 M + 3e−3βE0
; CV = 9E2
0
kBT 2 e−3βE0.
(6.126)
In what respects do these results for a quantum ideal gas diﬀer from the
properties of a classical ideal gas? Explain these diﬀerences physically.


7
Angular Momentum
In Chapter 4 we introduced the angular-momentum operators Ji as the gener-
ators of rotations. We showed that they form a pseudo-vector, so J2 = P
i J2
i
is a scalar. By considering the eﬀect of rotations on vectors and scalars, we
showed that the the Ji commute with all scalar operators, including J2, and
found that commutator of Ji with a component of vector operator is given
by equation (4.31). From this result we deduced that the Ji do not commute
with one another, but satisfy [Ji, Jj] = i P
k ǫijkJk.
Although we have from the outset called the Ji ‘angular-momentum
operators’, the only connection we have established between the Ji and an-
gular momentum is tenuous and by no means justiﬁes our terminology: we
have simply shown that when the Hamiltonian is invariant under rotations
about some axis ˆα, and the system starts in an eigenstate of the correspond-
ing angular-momentum operator ˆα · J, it will subsequently remain in that
eigenstate. Consequently, the corresponding eigenvalue is then a conserved
quantity. In classical mechanics dynamical symmetry about some axis im-
plies that the component of angular momentum about that axis is conserved,
so it is plausible that the conserved eigenvalue is a measure of angular mo-
mentum.
This suggestion will be substantiated in this chapter. Another
important task for the chapter is to explain how the orientation of a system
is encoded in the amplitudes for it to be found in diﬀerent eigenstates of
appropriate angular-momentum operators. We start by using the angular-
momentum commutation relations to determine the spectrum of the Ji.
7.1 Eigenvalues of Jz and J2
Since no two components of J commute, we cannot ﬁnd a complete set of
simultaneous eigenkets of two components of J. We can, however, ﬁnd a
complete set of mutual eigenkets of J2 and one component of J because
[J2, Ji] = 0. Without loss of generality we can orient our coordinates so that
the chosen component of J is Jz. Let us label a ket which is simultaneously
an eigenstate of J2 and Jz as |β, m⟩, where
J2|β, m⟩= β|β, m⟩
;
Jz|β, m⟩= m|β, m⟩.
(7.1)
We now deﬁne
J± ≡Jx ± iJy.
(7.2)


140
Chapter 7: Angular Momentum
These objects clearly commute with J2, while their commutation relations
with Jz are
[J+, Jz] = [Jx, Jz] + i[Jy, Jz] = −iJy −Jx = −J+
[J−, Jz] = [Jx, Jz] −i[Jy, Jz] = −iJy + Jx = J−.
(7.3)
Since J± commutes with J2, the kets J±|β, m⟩are eigenkets of J2 with
eigenvalue β. Operating with Jz on these kets we ﬁnd
JzJ+|β, m⟩= (J+Jz + [Jz, J+]) |β, m⟩= (m + 1)J+|β, m⟩
JzJ−|β, m⟩= (J−Jz + [Jz, J−]) |β, m⟩= (m −1)J−|β, m⟩.
(7.4)
Thus, J+|β, m⟩and J−|β, m⟩are also members of the complete set of states
that are eigenstates of both J2 and Jz, but their eigenvalues with respect to
Jz diﬀer from that of |β, m⟩by ±1. Therefore we may write
J±|β, m⟩= α±|β, m ± 1⟩,
(7.5)
where α± is a constant that we now evaluate. We do this by taking the
length-squared of both sides of equation (7.5). Bearing in mind that J†
+ =
J−, we ﬁnd
|α2
+| = ⟨β, m|J−J+|β, m⟩= ⟨β, m|(Jx −iJy)(Jx + iJy)|β, m⟩
= ⟨β, m|(J2 −J2
z −Jz)|β, m⟩= β −m(m + 1).
(7.6)
Similarly, |α−|2 = β −m(m −1), so
α± =
p
β −m(m ± 1).
(7.7)
The Ji are Hermitian operators, so ⟨ψ|J2
i |ψ⟩=
Ji|ψ⟩
2 ≥0. Hence
β = ⟨β, m|J2|β, m⟩= ⟨β, m|(J2
x + J2
y + J2
z )|β, m⟩≥m2.
(7.8)
So notwithstanding equation (7.5), it cannot be possible to create states with
ever larger eigenvalues of Jz by repeated application of J+. All that can stop
us doing this is the vanishing of α+ when we reach some maximum eigenvalue
mmax that from equation (7.7) satisﬁes
β −mmax(mmax + 1) = 0.
(7.9)
Similarly, α−must vanish for a smallest value of m that satisﬁes
β −mmin(mmin −1) = 0.
(7.10)
Eliminating β between (7.9) and (7.10) we obtain a relation between mmax
and mmin that we can treat as a quadratic equation for mmin. Solving this
equation we ﬁnd that
mmin = 1
2{1 ± (2mmax + 1)}.
(7.11)
The plus sign yields a value of mmin that is incompatible with our require-
ment that mmin ≤mmax, so we must have mmin = −mmax. To simplify the
notation, we deﬁne j ≡mmax, so that equation (7.9) becomes β = j(j + 1)
and −j ≤m ≤j. Finally, we note that since an integer number of applica-
tions of J−will take us from |β, j⟩to |β, −j⟩, 2j must be an integer – see
Figure 7.1. In summary, the eigenvalues of J2 are j(j+1) with 2j = 0, 1, 2, . . .
and for each value of j the eigenvalues m of Jz are (j, j −1, . . . , −j).
At this point we simplify the labelling of kets by deﬁning |j, m⟩to be
what has hitherto been denoted |β, m⟩with β = j(j + 1) – we clear a great


7.1 Eigenvalues of Jz and J2
141
Figure 7.1 Going from mmin to
mmax in an integer number of steps
in the cases j = 3
2, 2.
deal of clutter from the page by replacing |j(j +1), m⟩with |j, m⟩. The kets’
eigenvalues with respect to J2 are of course unaﬀected by this relabelling.
Had we known at the outset that the eigenvalues of J2 would be of the form
j(j + 1), we would have used the new notation all along.
In summary, we can ﬁnd simultaneous eigenstates of J2 and one of the
Ji, conventionally taken to be Jz. The eigenvalues of J2 are j(j + 1) with
2j = 0, 1, . . ., and for any given j the eigenvalues m of Jz then run from +j
to −j in integer steps:
j ≥m ≥−j.
(7.12)
In order to move from the state |j, m⟩to the adjacent state |j, m ± 1⟩we use
the raising or lowering operators J± which act as
J±|j, m⟩= α±(m)|j, m ± 1⟩=
p
j(j + 1) −m(m ± 1)|j, m ± 1⟩.
(7.13)
These operators only change the Jz eigenvalue, so they just realign a given
amount of total angular momentum, placing more (J+) or less (J−) along
the z-axis. So far, we have not discovered how to alter the J2 eigenvalue
j(j + 1).
It is sometimes helpful to rewrite the constants α±(m) of equation (7.13)
in the form
α+(m) =
p
(j −m)(j + m + 1)
α−(m) =
p
(j + m)(j −m + 1).
(7.14)
These equations make it clear that the proportionality constants for diﬀerent
m satisfy
α+(m) = α+(−m −1)
α−(m) = α−(−m + 1)
α+(m −1) = α−(m)
α−(m) = α+(−m).
(7.15)
For example, when J−lowers the highest state |j, j⟩, we obtain the same
proportionality constant as when J+ raises the lowest state |j, −j⟩; conse-
quently, we only need to work out half the constants directly, because we can
then infer the others.
By expressing Jx = 1
2(J+ + J−) in terms of the ladder operators, we
observe that when we apply Jx to a state |j, m⟩for j > 0 we obtain a ket
that diﬀers from |j, m⟩, so |j, m⟩is never an eigenket of Jx. Hence for j > 0
it is impossible to be certain what will be the result of measuring both Jz
and Jx. It is trivial to see that this argument extends to the pair (Jz, Jy),
so for j > 0 it is impossible to be certain of the outcome of more than one of
the Ji. If j = 0 the outcome measuring of any component of J is certainly
0, but a null vector has no direction. Consequently, there are no states in
which the vector J has a well-deﬁned direction. This situation contrasts with
the case of the momentum vector p, which can have a well deﬁned direction
because its components commute with one another.
In §4.1.2 we discovered that when the system is rotated through an
angle α around the z axis, its ket |ψ⟩transforms to |ψ′⟩= U(α)|ψ⟩, where


142
Chapter 7: Angular Momentum
the unitary operator U(α) = exp(−iαJz). If |ψ⟩= |j, m⟩is an eigenket of
Jz, U(α) simply changes its phase:
U(α)|j, m⟩= e−iαJz|j, m⟩= e−iαm|j, m⟩.
(7.16)
Since 2j is an integer, j (and hence m) must be either an integer or a half in-
teger. Using this information in equation (7.16), we see that, after a rotation
through 2π around the z-axis, we have either
|j, m⟩→|j, m⟩
for m even
(7.17a)
or
|j, m⟩→−|j, m⟩
for m odd.
(7.17b)
Equation (7.17a) is as expected; under a 2π rotation, the system returns to
its original state. However, equation (7.17b) says that a system with half
integer angular momentum does not return to its original state after a 2π
rotation – the initial and ﬁnal states are minus one another! This diﬀerence of
behaviour between systems with integer and half-integer angular momentum
is of fundamental importance, and determines many other characteristics of
these systems. A result of quantum ﬁeld theory is
that ‘spin-half’ ﬁelds
never attain macroscopic values: the quantum uncertainty in the value of
a spin-half ﬁeld is always on the same order as the value of the ﬁeld itself.
Integer-spin ﬁelds, by contrast, can attain macroscopic values: values that
are vastly greater than their quantum uncertainties. Consequently, classical
physics – physics in the absence of quantum uncertainty – involves integer-
spin ﬁelds (the electromagnetic and gravitational ﬁelds are examples) but no
spin-half ﬁeld. Our intuition about what happens when a system is rotated
has grown out of our experience of classical physics, so we consider that
things return to their original state after rotation by 2π. If we had hands-on
experience of spin-half objects, we would recognise that this is not generally
true.
7.1.1 Rotation spectra of diatomic molecules
Knowledge of the spectrum of the angular momentum operators enables us
to understand an important part of the dynamics of a diatomic molecule such
as carbon monoxide. For some purposes a CO molecule can be considered
to consist of two point masses, the nuclei of the oxygen and carbon atoms,
joined by a ‘light rod’ provided by the electrons. In this model the molecule’s
moment of inertia around the axis that joins the nuclei is negligible, while
the same moment of inertia I applies to any perpendicular axis.
In classical mechanics the rotational energy of a rigid body is
E = 1
2
J 2
x
Ix
+ J 2
y
Iy
+ J 2
z
Iz

,
(7.18)
where the Ii are the moments of inertia about the body’s three principal
axes and J is the body’s angular-momentum vector. We conjecture that
the equivalent formula links the Hamiltonian and the angular momentum
operators in quantum mechanics:
H = ¯h2
2
J2
x
Ix
+ J2
y
Iy
+ J2
z
Iz

.
(7.19)
The best justiﬁcation for adopting this formula is that it leads us to results
that are conﬁrmed by experiments.
In the case of an axisymmetric body, we orient our body such that
the symmetry axis is parallel to the z axis.
Then I ≡Ix = Iy and the
Hamiltonian can be written
H = ¯h2
2
J2
I + J2
z
 1
Iz
−1
I

.
(7.20)


7.1 Eigenvalues of Jz and J2
143
From this formula and our knowledge of the eigenvalues of J2 and Jz, we
can immediately write down the energies that form the spectrum of H:
Ejm = ¯h2
2
j(j + 1)
I
+ m2
 1
Iz
−1
I

,
(7.21)
where j is the total angular-momentum quantum number and |m| < j. In
the case of a diatomic molecule such as CO, Iz ≪I so the coeﬃcient of m2 is
very much larger than the coeﬃcient of j(j + 1) and states with |m| > 0 will
occur only far above the ground state. Consequently, the states of interest
have energies of the form
Ej = j(j + 1)¯h2
2I .
(7.22)
For reasons that will emerge in §7.2.2, only integer values of j are allowed.
CO is a signiﬁcantly dipolar molecule. The carbon atom has a smaller
share of the binding electrons than the oxygen atom, with the result that it
is positively charged and the oxygen atom is negatively charged. A rotating
electric dipole would be expected to emit electromagnetic radiation. Because
we are in the quantum regime, the radiation emerges as photons which, as
we shall see, can add or carry away only one unit ¯h of angular momentum.
It follows that the energies of the photons that can be emitted or absorbed
by a rotating dipolar molecule are
Ep = ± (Ej −Ej−1) = ±j ¯h2
I .
(7.23)
Using the relation E = hν between the energy of a photon and the frequency
ν of its radiation, the frequencies in the rotation spectrum of the molecule
are
νj = j ¯h
2πI .
(7.24)
In the case of 12CO, the coeﬃcient of j evaluates to 113.1724 GHz and spec-
tral lines occur at multiples of this frequency (Figure 7.2).
In the classical limit of large j, J = j¯h is the molecule’s angular mo-
mentum, and this is related to the angular frequency ω at which the molecule
rotates by J = Iω. When in equation (7.24) we replace j¯h by Iω, we dis-
cover that the frequency of the emitted radiation ν is simply the frequency
ω/2π at which the molecule rotates around its axis. This conclusion makes
perfect sense physically. Now, because of the form of the Hamiltonian, the
energy eigenstates are also the eigenstates of Jz and J2. Therefore in any
energy eigenstate,

J2
= j(j + 1) and for low-lying states with m = 0 and
j ∼O(1), j(j + 1) is signiﬁcantly larger than j2. Therefore νj in (7.24)
is smaller than the frequency at which the molecule rotates when it is in
the upper state of the transition. On the other hand, νj is larger than the
rotation frequency
p
(j −1)j
¯h
2πI of the lower state. Hence the frequency at
which radiation emerges lies between the rotation frequencies of the upper
and lower states. Again this makes sense physically. As we approach the
classical regime, j becomes large so j(j + 1) ≃j2 ≃(j −1)j and the rotation
frequencies of the upper and lower states converge, from above and below,
on the frequency of the emitted radiation.
Measurements of radiation from 115 GHz and the ﬁrst few multiples of
this frequency provide one of the two most important probes of interstel-
lar gas.1
In denser, cooler regions, hydrogen atoms combine to form H2
molecules, which are bisymmetric and do not have an electric dipole mo-
ment when they are simply rotating. Consequently, these molecules, which
1 The other key probe is the hyperﬁne line of atomic hydrogen that will be discussed
in Chapter 8.


144
Chapter 7: Angular Momentum
Figure 7.2 The rotation spectrum of CO. The full lines show the measured frequencies
for transitions up to j = 38 →37, while the dotted lines show integer multiples of the
lowest measured frequency. Up to the line for j = 22 →21 the dotted lines are obscured
by the full lines except at one frequency for which measurements are not available. For
j ≥22 the separation between the dotted and full lines increases steadily as a consequence
of the centrifugal stretching of the bond between the molecule’s atoms. Measurements are
lacking for several of the higher-frequency lines.
together with similarly uncommunicative helium atoms make up the great
majority of the mass of cold interstellar gas, lack readily observable spectral
lines. Hence astronomers are obliged to study the cold interstellar medium
through the rotation spectrum of the few parts in 106 of CO that it contains.
Important information can be gleaned from the relative intensities of
lines associated with diﬀerent values of j in equation (7.24). The rate at
which molecules emit radiation and thus the intensity of the line2 is propor-
tional to the number nj of molecules in the upper state. As we shall deduce
in §7.5.3, all states have equal a priori probability, so nj is proportional to
the number of states that have the given energy – the degeneracy or sta-
tistical weight g of the energy level. From §7.1 we know that g = 2j + 1
because this is the number of possible orientations of the angular momentum
for quantum number j.
In §6.4 we saw that when a gas is in thermal equilibrium at temper-
ature T , the probability pj that a given molecule is in a state of energy
Ej is proportional to the Boltzmann factor exp(−Ej/kBT ), where kB is the
Boltzmann constant (eq. 6.93a). Combining this proportionality with the
dependence on the degeneracy 2j + 1 just discussed leads us to expect that
the intensity of the line at frequency νj will be
Ij ∝(2j + 1) exp(−Ej/kBT )
(j > 0).
(7.25)
For E1 < kBT , Ij increases at small j before declining as the Boltzmann
factor begins to overwhelm the degeneracy factor. Fitting this formula, which
has only one free parameter (T ), to observed line intensities enables one both
to measure the temperature of the gas, and to check the correctness of the
degeneracy factor.
Figure 7.2 shows that for large values of the quantum number j, the
spacing between lines in the spectrum diminishes in apparent violation of the
prediction of equation (7.24). Lines with large j are generated by molecules
that are spinning very rapidly. The bond between the nuclei is stretched like
a spring by the centripetal acceleration of the nuclei. Stretching of the bond
increases the moment of inertia I, and from equation (7.24) this decreases
the frequency of the spectral lines (Problem 7.2).
2 We neglect the absorption of photons after emission, which can actually be an im-
portant process, especially for 12CO.


7.2 Orbital angular momentum
145
7.2 Orbital angular momentum
Let x and p be the position and momentum operators of the system. Then,
inspired by classical mechanics, we deﬁne the dimensionless orbital angular
momentum operators by3
L ≡1
¯hx × p,
that is
Li ≡1
¯h
X
jk
ǫijkxjpk.
(7.26)
From the rules of Table 2.1 and the Hermitian nature of x and p, the Her-
mitian adjoint of Li is
L†
i = 1
¯h
X
jk
ǫijkp†
kx†
j = 1
¯h
X
jk
ǫijkxjpk = Li,
(7.27)
where we have used the fact that [xj, pk] = 0 for j̸ = k. Thus the Li are
Hermitian and are likely to correspond to observables. We also deﬁne the
total orbital angular momentum operator by
L2 ≡L · L = L2
x + L2
y + L2
z,
(7.28)
which is again Hermitian, and calculate a number of commutators. First,
bearing in mind the canonical commutation relation (2.54), we have
[Li, xl] = 1
¯h
X
jk
ǫijk[xjpk, xl] = 1
¯h
X
jk
ǫijkxj[pk, xl] = −i
X
j
ǫijlxj
= i
X
j
ǫiljxj.
(7.29)
Similarly
[Li, pl] = 1
¯h
X
jk
ǫijk[xjpk, pl] = 1
¯h
X
jk
ǫijk[xj, pl]pk = i
X
j
ǫiljpj.
(7.30)
Notice that these commutation relations diﬀer from the corresponding ones
for Ji [equations (4.30) and (4.32)] only by the substitution of L for J. From
these relations we can show that Li commutes with the scalars x2, p2 and
x · p. For example
[Li, p2] =
X
j
[Li, p2
j] = i
X
jk
ǫijk(pkpj + pjpk) = 0,
(7.31)
where the last equality follows because the ǫ symbol is antisymmetric in jk
while the bracket is symmetrical in these indices (see also Problem 7.3). We
can now also calculate the commutator of one component of L with another.
We have
[Lx, Ly] = 1
¯h[Lx, (zpx −xpz)] = i(−ypx + xpy) = iLz.
(7.32)
Clearly each Li commutes with itself, and the other non-zero commutators
can be obtained from equation (7.32) by permuting indices. These commu-
tators mirror the commutators (7.104) of the Ji.
L is a vector operator by virtue of the way it is constructed out of the
vectors x and p. It follows that L2 is a scalar operator. Hence the way these
3 In many texts L is deﬁned without the factor ¯h−1. By making L dimensionless, this
factor simpliﬁes many subsequent formulae.


146
Chapter 7: Angular Momentum
operators commute with the total angular momentum operators Ji follows
from the work of §4.2:
[Ji, Lj] = i
X
k
ǫijkLk
;
[Ji, L2] = 0.
(7.33)
Although p2 and x2 commute with Li, the total angular momentum
operator J2 does not:
[J2, Li] =
X
j
[J2
j , Li] = i
X
jk
ǫjik(LkJj + JjLk).
(7.34)
The right side does not vanish because the ﬁnal bracket is not symmetric in
jk. The physical signiﬁcance of [J2, Li] being non-zero is that if our system
is in a state of well-deﬁned total angular momentum, in general there will
be uncertainty in the amount of orbital angular momentum it has about any
axis. We shall explore the consequences of this fact in §7.5.
7.2.1 L as the generator of circular translations
In §4.1.1 we saw that when the system is displaced along a vector a, its ket
is transformed by the unitary operator U(a) = e−ia·p/¯h. We now imagine
successively performing n translations through vectors {a1, a2 . . . , an}. Since
each translation will cause |ψ⟩to be acted on by a unitary operator, the ﬁnal
state will be
U(an) . . . U(a2)U(a1)|ψ⟩=
 n
Y
i=1
exp
 i
¯hai · p

|ψ⟩
= exp
 i
¯h
 n
X
i=1
ai
!
· p

|ψ⟩,
(7.35)
where the second equality follows because the components of p commute
with one another. Since the exponent in the last line is proportional to the
overall displacement vector A ≡Pn
i=1 ai, the change in |ψ⟩is independent
of the path that the system takes. In particular, if the path is closed, A = 0
and |ψ⟩is unchanged.
Now consider the eﬀect of moving the system in a circle centred on the
origin and in the plane with unit normal n. When we increment the rotation
angle α by δα, we move the system through
δa = δα n × x.
(7.36)
The associated unitary operator is
U(δa) = exp

−i
¯hδα (n × x) · p

= exp

−i
¯hδα n · (x × p)

= e−iδα n·L.
(7.37)
The unitary operator corresponding to rotation through a ﬁnite angle α is a
high power of this operator. Since the exponent contains only one operator,
n·L, which inevitably commutes with itself, the product of the exponentials
is simply
U(α) = e−iα·L,
(7.38)
where α ≡αn.
The diﬀerence between the total and orbital angular momentum oper-
ators is now apparent. When we rotate the system on a turntable through
an angle α, the system’s ket is updated by e−iα·J. When we move the sys-
tem around a circle without modifying its orientation, the ket is updated
by e−iα·L. The crucial insight is that the turntable both moves the system
around a circle and reorientates it. The transformations of which J is the
generator reﬂects both of these actions. The transformations of which L is
the generator reﬂects only the translation.


7.2 Orbital angular momentum
147
Figure 7.3 J both swings the particle around the origin and rotates its spin (left), while
L moves the particle, but leaves the direction of the spin invariant (right).
7.2.2 Spectra of L2 and Lz
We have shown that the Li commute with one another in exactly the same
way that the Ji do. In §7.1 we found the possible eigenvalues of J2 and Jz
from the commutation relations and nothing else. Hence we can without
further ado conclude that the possible eigenvalues of L2 and Lz are l(l + 1)
and m, respectively, with −l ≤m ≤l, where l is a member of the set
(0, 1
2, 1, 3
2, . . .).
In the last subsection we saw that L is the generator of translations
on circles around the origin, and we demonstrated that when a complete
rotation through 2π is made, the unitary operator that L generates is simply
the identity. Consider the case in which we move the system right around the
z axis when it is in the eigenstate |l, m⟩of L2 and Lz. The unitary operator
is then e−2πiLz and the transformed ket is
|l, m⟩= e−2πiLz|l, m⟩= e−2mπi|l, m⟩.
(7.39)
Since the exponential on the right side is equal to unity only for integer m,
we conclude that Lz, unlike Jz has only integer eigenvalues. Since for given
l, m runs from −l to l, it follows that l also takes only integer values. Thus
the spectrum of L2 is l(l + 1) with l = 0, 1, 2, . . ., and for given l the possible
values of Lz are the integers in the range (−l, l).
7.2.3 Orbital angular momentum eigenfunctions
We already know the possible eigenvalues of the operators L2 and Lz. Now
we ﬁnd the corresponding eigenfunctions.
In the position representation, the Li become diﬀerential operators. For
example
Lz = 1
¯h(xpy −ypx) = −i

x ∂
∂y −y ∂
∂x

(7.40)
Let (r, θ, φ) be standard spherical polar coordinates. Then the chain rule
states that
∂
∂φ = ∂x
∂φ
∂
∂x + ∂y
∂φ
∂
∂y + ∂z
∂φ
∂
∂z .
(7.41)
Using x = r sin θ cos φ, y = r sin θ sin φ and z = r cos θ we ﬁnd
∂
∂φ = r sin θ

−sin φ ∂
∂x + cos φ ∂
∂y

=

x ∂
∂y −y ∂
∂x

= iLz.
(7.42)
That is
Lz = −i ∂
∂φ.
(7.43)
Let |l, m⟩be a simultaneous eigenket of L2 and m for the eigenvalues l(l + 1)
and m, respectively. Then Lz|l, m⟩= m|l, m⟩and the wavefunction ψlm(x) ≡
⟨x|l, m⟩must satisfy the eigenvalue equation
−i∂ψlm
∂φ
= mψlm.
(7.44)


148
Chapter 7: Angular Momentum
The solution of this equation is
ψlm(r, θ, φ) = Klm(r, θ)eimφ,
(7.45)
where Klm is an arbitrary function of r and θ. Since m is an integer, ψlm is
a single-valued function of position.
In our determination of the spectra of J2 and Jz in §7.1, important roles
were played by the ladder operators J± = (Jx ± iJy). If we deﬁne
L± ≡Lx ± iLy,
(7.46)
then by analogy with equation (7.5) we will have that
L±|l, m⟩= α±|l, m ± 1⟩,
(7.47a)
where
α±(m) =
p
l(l + 1) −m(m ± 1).
(7.47b)
It will be helpful to express L± in terms of partial derivatives with re-
spect to spherical polar coordinates. We start by deriving a relation between
partial derivatives that we will subsequently require. From the chain rule we
have that
∂
∂θ = r cos θ

cos φ ∂
∂x + sin φ ∂
∂y

−r sin θ ∂
∂z .
(7.48a)
Multiplying the corresponding expression (7.42) for φ by cot θ yields
cot θ ∂
∂φ = r cos θ

−sin φ ∂
∂x + cos φ ∂
∂y

.
(7.48b)
Adding or subtracting i times (7.48b) to (7.48a) we obtain
∂
∂θ ± i cot θ ∂
∂φ = r cos θ

(cos φ ∓i sin φ) ∂
∂x + (sin φ ± i cos φ) ∂
∂y

−r sin θ ∂
∂z
= r cos θe∓iφ ∂
∂x ± i ∂
∂y

−r sin θ ∂
∂z .
(7.49)
Multiplying through by e±iφ, we obtain the needed relation:
e±iφ
 ∂
∂θ ± i cot θ ∂
∂φ

= r cos θ
 ∂
∂x ± i ∂
∂y

−r sin θ e±iφ ∂
∂z .
(7.50)
With this expression in hand we set to work on L+. In the position repre-
sentation it is
L+ = −i

y ∂
∂z −z ∂
∂y

+

z ∂
∂x −x ∂
∂z

= z
 ∂
∂x + i ∂
∂y

−(x + iy) ∂
∂z
= r cos θ
 ∂
∂x + i ∂
∂y

−r sin θ eiφ ∂
∂z ,
(7.51)
so with equation (7.50) we can write
L+ = eiφ ∂
∂θ + i cot θ ∂
∂φ

.
(7.52a)
Similarly
L−= −i

y ∂
∂z −z ∂
∂y

−

z ∂
∂x −x ∂
∂z

= −z
 ∂
∂x −i ∂
∂y

+ (x −iy) ∂
∂z
= −

r cos θ
 ∂
∂x −i ∂
∂y

−r sin θ e−iφ ∂
∂z

= −e−iφ ∂
∂θ −i cot θ ∂
∂φ

.
(7.52b)


7.2 Orbital angular momentum
149
Table 7.1
The ﬁrst six spherical harmonics
m
0
±1
±2
Ym
0
q
1
4π
Ym
1
q
6
8π cos θ
∓
q
3
8π sin θe±iφ
Ym
2
q
10
32π(3 cos2 θ −1)
∓
q
15
32π sin 2θe±iφ
q
15
32π sin2 θe±2iφ
The state |l, l⟩with the largest permissible value of m for given l must
satisfy the equation L+|l, l⟩= 0. Using equations (7.45) and (7.52a), in the
position representation this reads
∂Kll
∂θ
−l cot θKll = 0.
(7.53)
This is a ﬁrst-order linear diﬀerential equation.
Its integrating factor is
exp
 −l
R
dθ cot θ

= sin−l θ, so its solution is Kll = R(r) sinl θ, where R is
an arbitrary function. Substituting this form of Kll into equation (7.45), we
conclude that
ψll(r, θ, φ) = R(r) sinl θ eilφ.
(7.54)
From equation (7.54) we can obtain the wavefunctions ψlm of states with
smaller values of m simply by applying the diﬀerential operator L−. For
example
ψl(l−1)(r, θ, φ) = constant × R(r)e−iφ
−∂
∂θ + i cot θ ∂
∂φ

sinl θ eilφ
= constant × R(r) sinl−1 θ cos θei(l−1)φ.
(7.55)
Hence, the eigenfunctions of L2 and Lz for given l all have the same radial
dependence, R(r). The function of θ, φ that multiplies R in ψlm is conven-
tionally denoted Ym
l
and called a spherical harmonic. The normalisation
of Ym
l
is chosen such that
Z
d2Ω|Ym
l |2 = 1
with
d2Ω≡sin θ dθdφ
(7.56)
the element of solid angle. We have shown that
Yl
l ∝sinl θeilφ
and
Yl−1
l
∝sinl−1 θ cos θei(l−1)φ.
(7.57)
The normalising constants can be determined by ﬁrst evaluating the integral
Z
d2Ωsin2l θ = 4π 22l
(l!)2
(2l + 1)!
(7.58)
involved in the normalisation of Yl
l, and then dividing by the factor α−of
equation (7.47b) each time L−is applied.
The spherical harmonics Ym
l for l ≤2 are listed in Table 7.1. Figures 7.4
and 7.5 show contour plots of several spherical harmonics. Since spherical
harmonics are functions on the unit sphere, the ﬁgures show a series of
balls with contours drawn on them. Since spherical harmonics are complex
functions we had to decide whether to show the real part, the imaginary
part, the modulus or the phase of the function. We decided it was most
instructive to plot contours on which the real part is constant; when the real
part is positive, the contour is full, and when it is negative, the contour is
dotted.


150
Chapter 7: Angular Momentum
Figure 7.4 Contours of ℜ(Ym
15) on the unit sphere for m = 15 (left), m = 7 (centre) and
m = 2 (right). The contours on which ℜ(Ym
15) = 0 are the heavy curves, while contours
on which ℜ(Ym
15) < 0 are dotted. Contours of the imaginary part of Ym
l
would look the
same except shifted in azimuth by half the distance between the heavy curves of constant
azimuth.
Figure 7.5 Top row: contours of ℜ(Ym
1 ) for m = 1 (left) and 0 (right) with line styles
having the same meaning as in Figure 7.4. Contours of the imaginary part of Y1
l would
look the same as the left panel but with the circles centred on the y axis. Bottom row:
contours of ℜ(Ym
2 ) for m = 2 (left), m = 1 (centre) and m = 0 (right).
For large l, Yl
l is signiﬁcantly non-zero only where sin θ ≃1, i.e., around
the equator, θ = π/2 – the leftmost panel of Figure 7.4 illustrates this case.
The ﬁrst l applications of L−each introduce a term that contains one less
power of sin θ and an extra power of cos θ. Consequently, as m diminishes
from l to zero, the region of the sphere in which Ym
l
is signiﬁcantly non-zero
gradually spreads from the equator toward the poles – compare the leftmost
and rightmost panels of Figure 7.4. These facts make good sense physically:
Yl
l is the wavefunction of a particle that has essentially all its orbital angular
momentum parallel to the z axis, so the particle should not stray far from the
xy plane. Hence Yl
l, the amplitude to ﬁnd the particle at θ, should be small
for θ signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from π/2. As m diminishes the orbital plane is
becoming more inclined to the xy plane, so we are likely to ﬁnd the particle
further and further from the plane. This is why Ym
l
increases away from the
equator as m decreases.
For large l the phase of Yl
l changes rapidly with φ (leftmost panel of
Figure 7.4).
This is to be expected, because the particle’s large orbital
angular momentum, l¯h, implies that the particle has a substantial tangential
motion within the xy plane. From classical physics we estimate its tangential
momentum at p = l¯h/r, and from quantum mechanics we know that this


7.2 Orbital angular momentum
151
implies that the wavefunction must change its phase at a rate p/¯h = l/r
radians per unit distance. This estimate agrees precisely with the rate of
change of phase with distance around the equator arising from the factor eilφ
in Yl
l. When m is signiﬁcantly smaller than l (rightmost panel of Figure 7.4),
the rate of change of the wavefunction’s phase with increasing φ is smaller
because the particle’s tangential momentum is not all in the direction of
increasing φ. Hence Ym
l
∝eimφ.
For any value of m, Lx and Ly both have zero expectation values, as
follows immediately from the relation Lx = 1
2(L+ + L−). So the orientation
of the component of the angular momentum vector that lies in the xy plane
is completely uncertain. Because of this uncertainty, the modulus of Ym
l
is independent of φ, so there is no trace of an inclined orbital plane when
m < l. An orbital plane becomes deﬁned if there is some uncertainty in Lz,
with the result that there are non-zero amplitudes ψm = ⟨l, m|ψ⟩for several
values of m. In this case quantum interference between states of well-deﬁned
Lz can generate a peak in |⟨x|ψ⟩|2 along a great circle that is inclined to the
equator.
7.2.4 Orbital angular momentum and parity
In §4.1.4 we deﬁned the parity operator P, which turns a state with wave-
function ψ(x) into the state that has wavefunction ψ′(x) ≡ψ(−x). We now
show that wavefunctions that are proportional to a spherical harmonic Ym
l
are eigenfunctions of P with eigenvalue (−1)l.
In polar coordinates the transformation x →−x is eﬀected by θ →π−θ,
φ →φ+π. Under this mapping, sin θ = sin(π−θ) is unchanged, while eilφ →
eilπeilφ = (−1)leilφ. By equation (7.57), Yl
l ∝sinl θeilφ, so Yl
l →(−1)lYl
l.
That is, Yl
l has even parity if l is an even number and odd parity otherwise.
In §4.1.4 we saw that x and p are odd-parity operators: Px = −xP.
From this and the fact that the orbital angular momentum operators Li
are sums of products of a component of x and a component of p, it follows
that both the Li and the ladder operators L± = Lx ± iLy are even-parity
operators. Now Ym−1
l
= L−Ym
l /α−, where α−is a constant, so applying
the parity operator
PYl−1
l
=
1
α−
L−PYl
l = (−1)l 1
α−
L−Yl
l = (−1)lYl−1
l
.
(7.59)
That is, Yl−1
l
has the same parity as Yl
l. Since all the Ym
l
for a given l can
be obtained by repeated application of L−to Yl
l, it follows that they all have
the same parity, (−1)l.
7.2.5 Orbital angular momentum and kinetic energy
We now derive a very useful decomposition of the kinetic energy operator
HK ≡p2/2m into a sum of operators for the radial and tangential kinetic
energies. First we show that L2 is intimately related to the Laplacian opera-
tor ∇2. From the deﬁnition (7.46) of the ladder operators for orbital angular
momentum, we have
L+L−= (Lx + iLy)(Lx −iLy) = L2
x + L2
y + i[Ly, Lx]
= L2
x + L2
y + Lz.
(7.60)
Hence with equations (7.52) we may write
L2 = L+L−−Lz + L2
z
= eiφ ∂
∂θ + i cot θ ∂
∂φ
 
e−iφ
−∂
∂θ + i cot θ ∂
∂φ

+ i ∂
∂φ −∂2
∂φ2 .


152
Chapter 7: Angular Momentum
Diﬀerentiating out the right side
L2 = −∂2
∂θ2 −cot2 θ ∂2
∂φ2 +cot θ

−∂
∂θ +i cot θ ∂
∂φ

−i csc2 θ ∂
∂φ +i ∂
∂φ −∂2
∂φ2 .
The ﬁrst-order terms in ∂/∂φ cancel because cot2 θ −csc2 θ = −1. This
identity also enables us to combine the double derivatives in φ. Finally the
single and double derivatives in θ can be combined so that the equation
becomes
L2 = −

1
sin θ
∂
∂θ

sin θ ∂
∂θ

+
1
sin2 θ
∂2
∂φ2

,
(7.61)
which we recognise as −r2 times the angular part of the Laplacian operator
∇2.
Now we ask “what is the operator associated with radial momentum?”.
The obvious candidate is ˆr·p, where ˆr is the unit vector in the radial direction.
Unfortunately this operator is not Hermitian:
(ˆr · p)† = p · ˆr̸ = ˆr · p,
(7.62)
so it is not an observable. This is a particular case of a general phenomenon:
the product AB of two non-commuting observables A and B is never Her-
mitian. But it is easy to see that 1
2(AB + BA) is Hermitian. So we deﬁne
pr ≡1
2(ˆr · p + p · ˆr),
(7.63)
which is manifestly Hermitian.
We will need an expression for pr in the
position representation. Replacing p by −i¯h∇we have
pr = −i¯h
2
1
r r · ∇+ ∇· (r/r)

.
(7.64)
From the chain rule it is straightforward to show that
r ∂
∂r = x ∂
∂x + y ∂
∂y + z ∂
∂z = r · ∇.
(7.65)
Moreover, ∇· r = 3, so equation (7.64) can be rewritten
pr = −i¯h
2
 ∂
∂r + 3
r −r
r2 + ∂
∂r

= −i¯h
 ∂
∂r + 1
r

.
(7.66)
This expression enables us to ﬁnd the commutator
[r, pr] = −i¯h

r, ∂
∂r

= i¯h.
(7.67)
Squaring both sides of equation (7.66) yields
p2
r = −¯h2
 ∂
∂r + 1
r
  ∂
∂r + 1
r

= −¯h2
 ∂2
∂r2 + 2
r
∂
∂r −1
r2 + 1
r2

= −¯h2
r2
∂
∂r

r2 ∂
∂r

.
(7.68)
We recognise this operator as −¯h2 times the radial part of the Laplacian op-
erator ∇2. Since we have shown that L2 is −r2 times the angular part of the


7.2 Orbital angular momentum
153
Table 7.2
The ﬁrst ﬁve Legendre polynomials
l
0 1
2
3
4
Pl(µ)
1 µ
1
2(3µ2 −1)
1
2(5µ3 −3µ)
1
8(35µ4 −30µ2 + 3)
Laplacian (eq. 7.61), it follows that ∇2 = −(p2
r/¯h2 + L2/r2). Consequently,
the kinetic-energy operator HK = p2/2m = −(¯h2/2m)∇2 can be written
HK =
1
2m

p2
r + ¯h2L2
r2

.
(7.69)
The physical interpretation of this equation is clear: classically, the orbital
angular momentum ¯hL is mr × v = mrvt, where vt is the tangential speed,
so the term ¯h2L2/2mr2 = 1
2mv2
t is the kinetic energy associated with the
tangential motion. On the other hand p2
r/2m = 1
2mv2
r, so this term repre-
sents the kinetic energy due to radial motion, as we would expect. For future
reference we note that the kinetic-energy operator can be also written
HK = −¯h2
2m
 1
r2
∂
∂r

r2 ∂
∂r

−L2
r2

.
(7.70)
7.2.6 Legendre polynomials
The spherical harmonic Y0
l is special in that it is a function of θ only. We
now show that it is, in fact, a polynomial in cos θ. In the interval 0 ≤θ ≤
π of interest, θ is a monotone function of µ ≡cos θ, so without any loss
of generality we may take Y0
l to be proportional to a function Pl(µ). On
this understanding, Pl is an eigenfunction of L2 with eigenvalue l(l + 1).
Transforming the independent variable from θ to µ in our expression (7.61)
for L2, we ﬁnd that Pl must satisfy Legendre’s equation:
d
dµ

(1 −µ2)dPl
dµ

+ l(l + 1)Pl = 0.
(7.71)
We look for polynomial solutions of this equation. Putting in the trial solu-
tion Pl = P
n bnµn, we ﬁnd
X
n
bn

n(n −1)µn−2 −n(n + 1)µn + l(l + 1)µn	
= 0.
(7.72)
This equation must be valid for any value of µ in the interval (−1, 1), which
will be possible only if the coeﬃcient of each and every power of µ individually
vanishes. The coeﬃcient of µk is
0 = bk+2(k + 2)(k + 1) −bk {k(k + 1) −l(l + 1)} .
(7.73)
For k = 0 the expression connects b2 to b0, while for k = 2 it relates b4 to b2,
and so on. Thus from this equation we can express bn as a multiple of b0 for
even n, and as a multiple of b1 for odd n. Moreover, if l is an even number,
we know from our discussion of parity that Pl must be an even function
of µ, so in this case bn must vanish for n odd. Finally, bn will vanish for
n even and greater than l on account of the vanishing of the curly bracket
in equation (7.73) when k = l. This completes the proof that for even l,
Pl(µ) is a polynomial or order l. An extremely similar argument shows that
Pl(µ) is also a polynomial of order l when l is odd. The ﬁrst ﬁve Legendre
polynomials are listed in Table 7.2.


154
Chapter 7: Angular Momentum
The conventional normalisation of the Legendre polynomial Pl is the
requirement that Pl(1) = 1. With this property, the Pl are not orthonormal.
In fact
Z 1
−1
dµ Pl(µ)Pl′(µ) =
2
2l + 1δll′.
(7.74)
From this result it easily follows that the proportionality constant between
Pl(cos θ) and the orthonormal functions Y0
l (θ) is such that
Y0
l (θ) =
r
2l + 1
4π
Pl(cos θ).
(7.75)
7.3 Three-dimensional harmonic oscillator
In this section we discuss the dynamics of a particle that moves in three
dimensions subject to a central force that is proportional to the particle’s
distance from the origin. So the Hamiltonian is
H = p2
2m + 1
2mω2r2.
(7.76)
If we use Cartesian coordinates, this Hamiltonian becomes the sum of three
copies of the Hamiltonian of the one-dimensional harmonic oscillator that
was the subject of §3.1:
H = Hx + Hy + Hz,
(7.77)
where, for example, Hx = (p2
x/2m)+ 1
2mω2x2. These one-dimensional Hamil-
tonians commute with one another. So there is a complete set of mutual
eigenkets. Let |nx, ny, nz⟩be the state that is an eigenket of Hx with eigen-
value (nx + 1
2)¯hω eq. 3.12, etc. Then |nx, ny, nz⟩will be an eigenket of the
three-dimensional Hamiltonian (7.76) with eigenvalue
E = (nx + ny + nz + 3
2)¯hω.
(7.78)
Moreover, in the position representation the wavefunction of this state is just
a product of three of the wavefunctions we derived for stationary states of a
one-dimensional oscillator
ψ(x) = unx(x)uny(y)unz(z).
(7.79)
In view of these considerations it might be thought that there is nothing
we do not know about the Hamiltonian (7.76). However, it is instructive
to reanalyse the system from a more physical point of view, that recognises
that the system is spherically symmetric. We have seen that [Li, p2] = 0,
and [Li, r2] = 0, so [Li, H] = 0 and [L2, H] = 0. From this result it follows
that there is a complete set of mutual eigenstates of H, L2 and Lz. Very
few of the eigenstates obtained from the one-dimensional Hamiltonians are
eigenstates of either L2 or Lz. We now show how the eigenvalue problem
associated with (7.76) can be solved in a way that yields mutual eigenkets of
H, L2 and Lz. This exercise is instructive in itself, and some technology that
we will develop along the way will prove extremely useful when we analyse
the hydrogen atom in Chapter 8.
We use equation (7.69) to eliminate p2 from equation (7.76)
H = p2
r
2m + ¯h2L2
2mr2 + 1
2mω2r2.
(7.80)


7.3 Three-dimensional harmonic oscillator
155
Figure 7.6 The eﬀective potential
(7.82) for (from bottom to top)
l = 0, . . . , 5. The beads mark the
classical turning points at the values
of energy and angular momentum
that quantum mechanics allows.
We can assume that our energy eigenstates are also eigenstates of L2, so in
this Hamiltonian we can replace L2 by an eigenvalue l(l + 1). Hence we wish
to ﬁnd the eigenvalues of the radial Hamiltonian
Hl = p2
r
2m + l(l + 1)¯h2
2mr2
+ 1
2mω2r2.
(7.81)
This is the Hamiltonian for a particle that moves in a one-dimensional ef-
fective potential
Veﬀ(r) ≡l(l + 1)¯h2
2mr2
+ 1
2mω2r2.
(7.82)
Hl governs the oscillations of the mass about the minima of this potential,
which is plotted in Figure 7.6. The eigenkets |E, l, m⟩of H are products of
the eigenkets |E, l⟩of Hl and the eigenkets |l, m⟩of L2 and Lz:
|E, l, m⟩= |E, l⟩|l, m⟩.
(7.83)
Our determination of the allowed energies of a one-dimensional har-
monic oscillator exploited the dimensionless operators A and A†, which
rather nearly factorise H/¯hω. So here we deﬁne the operator
Al ≡
1
√
2m¯hω

ipr −(l + 1)¯h
r
+ mωr

.
(7.84)
The product of A and its Hermitian adjoint A†
l is
A†
l Al =
1
2m¯hω

−ipr −(l + 1)¯h
r
+ mωr
 
ipr −(l + 1)¯h
r
+ mωr

=
1
2m¯hω
(
p2
r +

−(l + 1)¯h
r
+ mωr
2
+ i

−(l + 1)¯h
r
+ mωr, pr
)
=
1
2m¯hω

p2
r + l(l + 1)¯h2
r2
+ m2ω2r2 −(2l + 3)¯hmω

.
(7.85)
Comparing the right side with equation (7.81), we see that
Hl = ¯hω
n
A†
l Al + (l + 3
2)
o
,
(7.86)
which bears a strong similarity to equation (3.3) for the one-dimensional
harmonic oscillator.


156
Chapter 7: Angular Momentum
The commutator of Al and A†
l is
[Al, A†
l ] =
1
2m¯hω

ipr −(l + 1)¯h
r
+ mωr

,

−ipr −(l + 1)¯h
r
+ mωr

=
i
m¯hω

pr,

−(l + 1)¯h
r
+ mωr

= (l + 1)¯h
mωr2
+ 1,
(7.87)
where we have used equation (7.67) to reach the last line. This result can be
written more usefully in the form
[Al, A†
l ] = Hl+1 −Hl
¯hω
+ 1.
(7.88)
From this expression and equation (7.86) we can easily calculate the com-
mutator of Hl with Al:
[Al, Hl] = ¯hω[Al, A†
l Al] = ¯hω[Al, A†
l ]Al = (Hl+1 −Hl + ¯hω)Al.
(7.89)
Now let |E, l⟩be an eigenket of Hl with eigenvalue E:
Hl|E, l⟩= E|E, l⟩.
(7.90)
We multiply both sides of the equation by Al and use equation (7.89) to
reverse the order of Al and Hl:
EAl|E, l⟩= AlHl|E, l⟩= (HlAl + [Al, Hl])|E, l⟩
= (Hl+1 + ¯hω)Al|E, l⟩.
(7.91)
On rearrangement this yields
Hl+1(Al|E, l⟩) = (E −¯hω)(Al|E, l⟩),
(7.92)
which says that Al|E, l⟩is an eigenket of Hl+1 for the eigenvalue E −¯hω, so
Al|E, l⟩= α−|E −¯hω, l + 1⟩,
(7.93)
where α−is a normalising constant.
Al creates the radial wavefunction for a state that has more orbital
angular momentum and less energy than the state with which it started.
That is, Al diminishes the radial kinetic energy by some amount and adds a
smaller quantity of energy to the tangential motion. If we repeat this process
a suﬃcient number of times, by following Al with Al+1 and Al+1 with Al+2,
and so on, there will come a point at which no radial kinetic energy remains
– we will have reached the quantum equivalent of a circular orbit. The next
application of Al must annihilate the wavefunction. Hence AL|E, L⟩= 0,
where L(E) is the largest allowed value of l for energy E. If we operate on
|E, L⟩with HL, we ﬁnd with equation (7.86) that
E|E, L⟩= HL|E, L⟩= ¯hω(L + 3
2)|E, L⟩,
(7.94)
so
E = (L + 3
2)¯hω
and
L(E) = E
¯hω −3
2.
Since L is a non-negative integer, it follows that the ground-state energy is
3
2¯hω and that the ground state has no angular momentum. In general E/¯hω
is any integer plus 3
2. These values of the allowed energies agree perfectly
with what we could have deduced by treating H as a sum of three one-
dimensional harmonic-oscillator Hamiltonians.


7.3 Three-dimensional harmonic oscillator
157
Figure 7.7 Radial probability distributions of circular orbits in the three-dimensional
harmonic oscillator potential for L = 1 and L = 8. The scale radius ℓ=
p
¯h/2mω.
We shall deﬁne a circular orbit to be one that has the maximum an-
gular momentum possible at its energy. We obtain the radial wavefunctions
of these by writing the equation AL|E, L⟩= 0 in the position representation.
With equations (7.84) and (7.66) this equation becomes
 ∂
∂r + 1
r −L + 1
r
+ mω
¯h r

uL(r) = 0.
(7.95)
This is a ﬁrst-order linear diﬀerential equation. Its integrating factor is
exp
Z
dr

−L
r + mω
¯h r

= r−L exp
mω
2¯h r2
,
(7.96)
so the solution of equation (7.95) is
uL(r) = constant × rLe−r2/4ℓ2,
where
ℓ≡
p
¯h/2mω.
(7.97)
Notice that the exponential factor is simply the product of three exponential
factors from equation (3.15), one in x, one in y and one in z. The wavefunc-
tion varies with r, so a circular orbit does have some radial kinetic energy.
In the limit of large L in which classical mechanics applies, the radial kinetic
energy is negligible compared to the tangential kinetic energy, and we neglect
it. But it never really vanishes.
Equation (7.97) gives the radial wavefunction for a circular orbit. The
complete wavefunction is ψ(x) = uL(r)Ym
L (θ, φ), and since
R
d2ΩYm
l
= 1,
the radial probability density is P(r) = r2u2
L ∝r2L+2e−r2/2ℓ2, where the
factor r2 arises from the expression for the volume element d3x in spherical
polar coordinates. This density is plotted in Figure 7.7 for L = 1 and L = 8.
For r/ℓ≪
√
2L + 2, P rises as r2L+2. For r/ℓ>
√
2L + 2 it falls rapidly as
the Gaussian factor takes over. Figure 7.7 shows that the uncertainty in r is
∼ℓ, which is a small fraction of r when L is not small.
We may obtain the radial wavefunctions of more eccentric orbits by
showing that A†
l is a raising operator. Equation (7.89) yields
AlHl = Hl+1Al + ¯hωAl
(7.98)
Daggering both sides we have
HlA†
l = A†
l Hl+1 + ¯hωA†
l .
(7.99)


158
Chapter 7: Angular Momentum
Figure 7.8 The (E, l) plane and the
action of Al and A†
l−1.
We now multiply both sides of Hl+1|E, l + 1⟩= E|E, l + 1⟩by A†
l :
EA†
l |E, l + 1⟩= A†
l Hl+1|E, l + 1⟩= (Hl −¯hω)A†
l |E, l + 1⟩.
(7.100)
Rearranging
Hl(A†
l |E, l + 1⟩) = (E + ¯hω)(A†
l |E, l + 1⟩).
(7.101)
Thus, we have shown that
A†
l |E, l + 1⟩= α+|E + ¯hω, l⟩,
(7.102)
where α+ is a normalising constant. By writing A†
l in the position repre-
sentation, we can generate the wavefunctions of all non-circular orbits by
repeatedly applying A†
l to the current wavefunction, starting with that of
a circular orbit.
We start with the product of rL and a Gaussian factor
[equation (7.97)]. From this A†
L−1 generates terms proportional to rL+1 and
rL−1 times the Gaussian (Problem 7.25). From these two terms A†
L−2 then
generates three terms, rL+2, rL and rL−2 times the Gaussian, and so on.
Consequently the number of radial nodes – radii at which the wavefunction
vanishes – increases by one with each application of A†
l , and the wavefunc-
tion oscillates more and more rapidly in radius as A†
l invests a larger and
larger fraction of the particle’s kinetic energy in radial motion.
Figure 7.8 helps to organise the generation of radial wavefunctions. Each
dot represents a radial wavefunction. From the dot at (E, l), operating with
Al carries one to the next dot up and to the left, while operating with A†
l−1
carries one to the next dot down and to the right.
At half the energies
only even values of l occur, and only odd values of l occur at the other
half of the energies. In Problem 7.22 you can show that, when one bears in
mind that each dot gives rise to 2l + 1 complete wavefunctions, the number
of wavefunction with energy E that we obtain in this way agrees with the
number that we would obtain using wavefunctions of the one-dimensional
harmonic oscillator via equation (7.79).
7.4 Spin angular momentum
In §7.2.1 we saw that the diﬀerence between J and L is that J is the gener-
ator for complete rotations of the system, while L is the generator for dis-
placements of the system around circles, while leaving its orientation ﬁxed
(Figure 7.3). Consequently the diﬀerence
S ≡J −L
(7.103)
is the generator for changes of orientation that are not accompanied by any
motion of the system as a whole. Since J and L are vector operators, S is
also a vector operator. Its components are called the spin operators.


7.4 Spin
159
We saw in §7.2 that L has exactly the same commutation relations as
J with any function of the position and momentum operators only. From
this fact and the deﬁnition (7.103), it follows that S commutes with all such
functions. In particular [S, x] = [S, p] = [S, L] = 0. This essentially tells us
that S has nothing to do with a system’s location, nor the way in which it
may or may not be moving. S is associated with intrinsic properties of the
system.
The components Si of the spin operator inherit the usual angular mo-
mentum commutation rules from Ji and Li:
[Si, Sj] = [Ji −Li, Jj −Lj]
= [Ji, Jj] −[Li, Jj] −[Ji, Lj] + [Li, Lj]
= i
X
k
ǫijk(Jk −Lk −Lk + Lk)
= i
X
k
ǫijkSk.
(7.104)
We deﬁne S2 ≡S · S and then equation (7.104) ensures that
[S, S2] = 0.
(7.105)
Because the Si have exactly the same form of commutation relations as the
Ji, we know that the possible eigenvalues of S2 are the numbers 0, 1
2, 1, 3
2, . . .
and that for given s the eigenvalues m of the Si move in integer steps from −s
to s. Can s take half-integer values? This question is answered aﬃrmatively
by equation (7.103); since [Jz, Lz] = 0 we can ﬁnd a complete set of states
that simultaneously have well-deﬁned values of both Jz and Lz. In general,
the Jz eigenvalue could be either an integer or half-integer, whereas the Lz
eigenvalue must be an integer. The diﬀerence Sz = Jz −Lz must then be
either an integer or half-integer.
In the rest of this book we will make extensive use of commutation
relations involving angular momentum operators. In Table 7.3 these have
been gathered for later reference.
7.4.1 Spin and orientation
We have several times stated without proof that the orientation of the system
is encoded in the amplitudes ajm for the system to be found in states of well
deﬁned angular momentum, |j, m⟩. We now begin to justify this claim. For
simplicity we consider spin angular momentum because we want to focus on
the orientation of our system without concerning ourselves with its location.
However, what we refer to as ‘spin’ is the total intrinsic angular momentum
of the system. If the latter is a hydrogen atom, for example, it may contain a
contribution from the orbital angular momentum of the electron in addition
to the contributions from the intrinsic spins of the electron and the proton.
Since the Si are Hermitian operators, any state |ψ⟩may be expanded
in terms of the complete set of eigenstates |s, m⟩of, say, Sz and S2. We
have seen that these states are labelled by an integer or half integer s, with
−s ≤m ≤s, so the complete expansion is
|ψ⟩=
X
s=0, 1
2 ,1,...
s
X
m=−s
⟨s, m|ψ⟩|s, m⟩.
(7.106)
Fortunately, systems for which quantum mechanical eﬀects are signiﬁcant
rarely have more than a handful of non-zero amplitudes ⟨s, m|ψ⟩in the sum
of equation (7.106). In the simplest case we have an object with s = 0, a
spin-zero object, such a pion. The sum in equation (7.106) contains only


160
Chapter 7: Angular Momentum
Table 7.3
Commutators involving angular momentum
[Ji, vj] = i P
k ǫijkvk
where v is any vector or pseudovector
[Ji, s] = 0
where s is any scalar or pseudoscalar
[Li, wj] = i P
k ǫijkwk where w is any vector or pseudovector function
of only x, p and constant scalars and pseudoscalars
[Li, f] = 0
where f is any scalar or pseudoscalar function
of only x, p and constant scalars and pseudoscalars
[Si, w] = 0
where w is any function of spatial operators
The following are important special cases of the above results
[Ji, Jj] = i P
k ǫijkJk
[Ji, Lj] = i P
k ǫijkLk
[Ji, Sj] = i P
k ǫijkSk
[Li, Lj] = i P
k ǫijkLk
[Si, Sj] = i P
k ǫijkSk
[Li, Sj] = 0
[Ji, J2] = 0
[Ji, L2] = 0
[Ji, S2] = 0
[Li, L2] = 0
[Li, S2] = 0
[Si, L2] = 0
[Si, S2] = 0
[L2, J2] = 0
[S2, J2] = 0
Since J = L + S and therefore J2 = L2 + S2 + 2L · S we also have
[Li, J2] = 2i P
jk ǫijkSjLk
[Si, J2] = 2i P
jk ǫijkLjSk
one eigenstate with s = 0, the state |0, 0⟩because an object with no spin
cannot have any spin angular momentum around the z axis.
When we rotate an object about the direction α without translating
it, its state is updated by the operator U(α) = e−iα·S (cf. equation 4.13).
When we apply this operator to a state of a spin-zero object, the state
emerges unchanged:
U(α)|0, 0⟩= exp (−iα · S) |0, 0⟩= |0, 0⟩.
(7.107)
Hence, a spin-zero object, like a perfect sphere, is completely unchanged by
an arbitrary rotation. In view of their invariance under rotations, spin zero
particles are sometimes known as scalar particles.4
Some very important systems require just the two terms in equation
(7.106) that are associated with s = 1
2. These systems are called spin-half
objects. Electrons, quarks, protons and neutrons fall into this category. For
example, by equation (7.106) the state of an electron can be written
|e−⟩=
1
2
X
m=−1
2
⟨1
2, m|e−⟩| 1
2, m⟩.
(7.108)
4 Since both J and S commute with the parity operator P , behaviour under rotations
does not tell us about behaviour under reﬂection, so spin zero particles could also be
pseudoscalars. In fact, pions are pseudoscalar particles.


7.4 Spin
161
Because there are only two terms in this expansion, the quantum uncertainty
in the orientation of a spin-half system is very great. We shall see that the
most precise information we can have is that the end of the system’s angular
momentum vector lies in a given hemisphere – for example, we could state
that it lies within the northern rather than the southern hemisphere, or the
western rather than the eastern hemisphere. Where it lies in the hemisphere
is shrouded in quantum uncertainty.
Another important class of systems contains those that have total spin
quantum number s = 1. These systems are called spin-one objects. The W
and Z bosons fall in this class. For a spin-one system, the expansion (7.106)
reduces to just (2s + 1) = 3 terms. For example, the state of a Z boson can
be written
|Z⟩=
1
X
m=−1
⟨1, m|Z⟩|1, m⟩.
(7.109)
We will see that we can constrain the end of the angular-momentum vector
of a spin-one system to lie within a chosen polar cap, or in the equatorial
band that lies between opposite polar caps.
The larger a system’s spin s, the more precisely we can constrain the
end of its angular momentum vector. It is rather as if systems were subject
to random torques of a certain magnitude, and the faster it is spinning,
the more stable its orientation can be in the face of the random torques.
The same physical principle underlies the use of riﬂing in guns to stabilise
the orientation of the projectile by imparting angular momentum to it as
it ﬂies down the barrel. A few concrete examples will clarify the physical
interpretation of the quantum states |s, m⟩.
7.4.2 Spin-half systems
As in equation (7.108), the state of any spin-half system may be expanded
in terms of just two Sz eigenstates | 1
2, + 1
2⟩and | 1
2, −1
2⟩which we will call
|+⟩and |−⟩respectively. Equation (7.108) then reads |ψ⟩= a|+⟩+ b|−⟩. In
this basis we can write the operators as (cf. equation 2.16)5
Sx =

⟨+|Sx|+⟩
⟨+|Sx|−⟩
⟨−|Sx|+⟩
⟨−|Sx|−⟩

;
Sy =

⟨+|Sy|+⟩
⟨+|Sy|−⟩
⟨−|Sy|+⟩
⟨−|Sy|−⟩

Sz =

⟨+|Sz|+⟩
⟨+|Sz|−⟩
⟨−|Sz|+⟩
⟨−|Sz|−⟩

.
(7.110)
The elements of the matrix Sz are trivially evaluated because |±⟩are the
eigenkets of Sz with eigenvalues ± 1
2. To evaluate the other two matrices we
notice that Sx = 1
2(S+ + S−), and Sy = 1
2i(S+ −S−), then use the relations
S+|−⟩= |+⟩and S−|+⟩= |−⟩which follow from equations (7.5) and (7.7)
for the spin operator. The result of these operations is
Sx = 1
2

0
1
1
0

; Sy = 1
2

0
−i
i
0

; Sz = 1
2

1
0
0
−1

.
(7.111)
The matrices appearing here are the Pauli matrices,
σx ≡

0
1
1
0

; σy ≡

0
−i
i
0

; σz ≡

1
0
0
−1

,
(7.112)
so we can write S = 1
2σ. It is straightforward to verify that the square of
any Pauli matrix is the identity matrix:
σ2
i = I.
(7.113)
This result implies that for any state

S2
x

=

S2
y

=

S2
z

= 1
4, which is
consistent with the fact that the measurement of any component of S can
produce only ± 1
2.
The Stern–Gerlach experiment
In 1922, Stern and Gerlach6 conducted
5 Here we are again slightly abusing the notation; Si are taken to be both the spin
operators and their matrix representations.
6 Gerlach, W. & Stern, O., 1922, Zeit. f. Physik, 9, 349


162
Chapter 7: Angular Momentum
Figure 7.9 Schematic of a Stern–
Gerlach ﬁlter. The atomic beam en-
ters from the left. Between the pole
pieces the magnetic ﬁeld increases
in intensity upwards, so atoms that
have their spins aligned with B are
deﬂected upwards and the other
atoms are deﬂected downwards.
Figure 7.10 Beam split by an SG
ﬁlter and then up beam hits a sec-
ond ﬁlter.
some experiments with silver atoms that most beautifully illustrate the de-
gree to which one can know the orientation of a spin-half object. In addi-
tion to this interest, these experiments provide clear examples of the stan-
dard procedure for extracting experimental predictions from the formalism
of quantum mechanics.
A silver atom is a spin-half object and has a magnetic dipole moment
µ. which can be used to track the atom’s orientation. In a magnetic ﬁeld
B, a magnetic dipole experiences a force ∇(µ · B). Consequently, in a ﬁeld
that varies in strength with position, a dipole that is oriented parallel to B
is drawn in to the region of enhanced |B|, whereas one that is antiparallel
to B is repelled from this region. Stern and Gerlach exploited this eﬀect to
construct ﬁlters along the lines sketched in Figure 7.9. A powerful magnet
has one pole sharpened to a knife edge while the other forms either a ﬂat
surface (as shown) or is slightly concave. With this geometry the magnetic
ﬁeld lines are close packed as they stream out of the knife edge, and then
fan out as they approach the ﬂat pole-piece. Consequently the intensity of
the magnetic ﬁeld increases towards the knife edge and the Stern–Gerlach
ﬁlter sorts particles according to the orientation of their magnetic moments
with respect to B.
The experiments all start with a beam of sliver atoms moving in vacuo,
which is produced by allowing vapourised silver to escape from an oven
through a suitable arrangement of holes – see Figure 7.10. When the beam
passes into a ﬁlter, F1, it splits into just two beams of equal intensity. We
explain this phenomenon by arguing that the operator µi associated with
the ith component of an atom’s magnetic moment is proportional to Si:
µi = gSi. Hence the ﬁlter has ‘measured’ n · S, where n is the unit vector in
the direction of B; we are at liberty to orient our coordinate system so that
n = ez, and n·S = Sz. We know that for a spin-half system, a measurement
of Sz can yield only ± 1
2, so the splitting of the beam into two is explained.
Given that there was nothing in the apparatus for producing the beam that
favoured up over down as a direction for µ, it is to be expected that half of
the atoms return + 1
2 and half −1
2, so the two sub-beams have equal intensity.
We block the sub-beam associated with Sz = −1
2 so that only particles with
Sz = 1
2 emerge from the ﬁlter.
We now place a second Stern-Gerlach ﬁlter, F2, in the path of the |+⟩
sub-beam, as shown in Figure 7.10, and investigate the eﬀect of rotating the
ﬁlter’s magnetic axis n in the plane perpendicular to the incoming beam’s
direction. Let this be the yz plane. The incoming particles are deﬁnitely in
the state7 |+, z⟩because they’ve just reported + 1
2 on a measurement of Sz.
7 We relabel |+⟩→|+, z⟩to make clear that this is a state with spin up along the


7.4 Spin
163
F2 measures n · S, where n = (0, sin θ, cos θ) with θ the direction between
n and the z-axis.
If |+, θ⟩is the eigenket of n · S with eigenvalue + 1
2,
the amplitude that the measurement yields + 1
2 is ⟨+, θ|+, z⟩. The deﬁning
equation of |+, θ⟩is 1
2n·σ|+, θ⟩= 1
2|+, θ⟩or, using the matrix representation
(7.111)

cos θ
−i sin θ
i sin θ
−cosθ
 
a
b

=

a
b

,
(7.114)
where a ≡⟨+, z|+, θ⟩and b ≡⟨−, z|+, θ⟩. We have to solve this equation
subject to the normalisation condition |a|2 + |b|2 = 1. From the ﬁrst row of
the matrix we deduce that
b
a = i1 −cos θ
sin θ
.
(7.115)
From the trigonometric double-angle formulae we have 1 −cos θ = 2 sin2 1
2θ
and sin θ = 2 sin 1
2θ cos 1
2θ, so
b
a = i sin 1
2θ
cos 1
2θ.
(7.116)
The choices

a
b

=

cos 1
2θ
i sin 1
2θ

(7.117)
satisfy both equation (7.116) and the normalisation condition. The ampli-
tude that a particle with spin up along the z-axis also has spin up along the
n-axis is a∗= ⟨+, θ|+, z⟩, so the probability that an atom will pass F2 is
P2 = |a|2 = cos2 1
2θ.
(7.118)
Thus, as θ is increased from 0 to π, the fraction of atoms that get through
F2 declines from unity to zero, becoming 1
2 when θ = π/2 and the magnetic
axes of F1 and F2 are at right angles. Physically it would be surprising if
the fraction that passed F2 when θ = π/2 were not a half since, when the
magnetic moments of incoming atoms are perpendicular to the magnetic axis
of a ﬁlter, there is nothing in the geometry of the experiment to favour the
outgoing particles being parallel to the magnetic axis, rather than antipar-
allel. When θ = π the magnetic axes of the ﬁlters are antiparallel and it is
obvious that every atom passed by F1 must be blocked by F2. This agrees
with what we found out about a spin-half object’s orientation in the previous
section; if it is pointing somewhere in the upper z hemisphere, then there is
some chance it is also pointing in any other hemisphere apart from the −z
one.
We now place a third ﬁlter, F3, in the atomic beam that emerges from
F2.
Let φ denote the angle between the magnetic axis of this ﬁlter and
the z-axis. The atoms that emerge from F2 are in the state |+, θ⟩because
they’ve just returned 1
2 on a measurement of n · S, so the amplitude that
these atoms get through F3 is ⟨+, φ|+, θ⟩. The amplitudes a′ ≡⟨+, z|+, φ⟩
and b′ ≡⟨−, z|+, φ⟩can be obtained directly from the formula we already
have for (a, b) with φ substituted for θ. Hence

a′
b′

=

cos 1
2φ
i sin 1
2φ

.
(7.119)
and the amplitude to pass F3 is
⟨+, φ|+, θ⟩=
X
s=±
⟨+, φ|s, z⟩⟨s, z|+, θ⟩
=
 cos 1
2φ, −i sin 1
2φ
 
cos 1
2θ
i sin 1
2θ

= cos 1
2(φ −θ).
(7.120)
z-axis.


164
Chapter 7: Angular Momentum
Thus the amplitude to pass F3 depends only on the angle φ −θ between
the magnetic axes of the ﬁlters, and the probability of passing F3 could
have been obtained simply by substituting this angle into equation (7.118).
This conclusion is obvious physically, but it is satisfying to see it emerge
automatically from the formalism.
An especially interesting case is when θ = π/2 and φ = π. In the absence
of F2, F3 would now block every atom that passed F1. But with F2 present
both F2 and F3 allow through half of the atoms that reach them, so a quarter
of the atoms that leave F1 with Sz = + 1
2 pass both ﬁlters. These atoms exit
from F3 with Sz = −1
2. Introducing F2 changes the fraction of atoms that
pass F3 because the measurement that F2 makes changes the states of the
atoms. This is a recurring theme in quantum mechanics. No measurement
can be made without slightly disturbing the system that is being measured,
and if the system is small enough, the disturbance caused by a measurement
can signiﬁcantly aﬀect the system’s dynamics.
7.4.3 Spin-one systems
In the case that s = 1, three values of m are possible, −1, 0, 1, and so the
Si may be represented by 3 × 3 matrices. The calculation of these matrices
proceeds exactly as for spin half, the main diﬀerence being that (7.5) and
(7.7) now yield
S+| −1⟩= √2|0⟩; S+|0⟩= √2|1⟩;
S−|1⟩= √2|0⟩; S−|0⟩= √2| −1⟩.
(7.121)
The result is
Sx =
1
√2


0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0


;
Sy =
1
√2


0
−i
0
i
0
−i
0
i
0


Sz =


1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−1

.
(7.122)
Consider the eﬀect of using Stern-Gerlach ﬁlters on a beam of spin-
one atoms. In the experiment depicted in Figure 7.10 each ﬁlter now splits
the incoming beam into three sub-beams, and we block all but the beam
associated with m = +1 along the magnetic axis. One third of the atoms
that emerge from the collimating slits get through the ﬁrst ﬁlter F1 because
each value of m is equally probable at this stage.8 To calculate the fraction
of atoms which then pass through F2, the magnetic axis of which is inclined
at angle θ to that of F1, we must calculate the amplitude ⟨1, θ|1, z⟩. The
deﬁning equation of |1, θ⟩is n · S|1, θ⟩= |1, θ⟩, which with equations (7.122)
can be written



cos θ
−i
√2 sin θ
0
i
√2 sin θ
0
−i
√2 sin θ
0
i
√2 sin θ
−cosθ





a
b
c

=


a
b
c

,
(7.123)
where a ≡⟨1, z|1, θ⟩, b ≡⟨0, z|1, θ⟩, and c ≡⟨−1, z|1, θ⟩. The ﬁrst and third
equations, respectively, yield
(cos θ −1)a =
i√2 sin θ b
and
i
√2 sin θ b = (1 + cos θ)c.
(7.124)
8 The atoms emerge from the slits in an impure state (§6.3) and we set the probabilities
for each value of m to 1
3 in order to maximise the Shannon entropy of that state (§6.3.2).
The equality of the probabilities is an instance of the general principle that every quantum
state has equal a priori probability.


7.4 Spin
165
Eliminating a and c in favour of b yields


a
b
c

= b






i
√2
sin θ
cos θ −1
1
i
√2
sin θ
cos θ + 1






= b


−i
√2 cot(θ/2)
1
i
√2 tan(θ/2)

.
(7.125)
The normalisation condition |a|2 + |b|2 + |c|2 = 1 now implies that b =
√
2 sin( 1
2θ) cos( 1
2θ). The coeﬃcient that we need is therefore
⟨1, θ|1, z⟩= a = i cos2( 1
2θ) = i
2(1 + cos θ).
(7.126)
Hence the probability that an atom passes F2 after passing F1 falls from unity
when θ = 0 to zero when θ = π as we would expect. When θ = π/2 the
probability is P3 = 1
4, which is substantially smaller than the corresponding
probability of 1
2 found in (7.118) for the case of spin-half atoms.
From a classical point of view it is surprising that after F1 has selected
atoms that have their angular momentum oriented parallel to the z-axis
(in the sense that Sz takes the largest allowed value) there is a non-zero
probability P3 that the angular momentum is subsequently found to be, in
the same sense, aligned with the y axis. The explanation of this phenomenon
is that for this system, the value of S2 is s(s+1) = 2 which is twice the largest
allowed value of Sz. Hence, even in the state |1, z⟩a signiﬁcant component
of the angular momentum lies in the xy plane. P3 is the probability that
this component is found to be parallel to the y axis. Once the measurement
of Sy has been made by F3, the atom is no longer in the state |1, z⟩and we
are no longer certain to obtain 1 if we remeasure Sz.
7.4.4 The classical limit
An electric motor that is, say, 1 cm in diameter and weighs about 10 gm
might spin at 100 revolutions per second. Its angular momentum would then
be ∼10−3 kg m2 s−1, which is ∼1031¯h. Thus classical physics works with
extremely large values of the integers s, m. It is interesting to understand
how familiar phenomena emerge from the quantum formalism when s is no
longer small.
For any value of s we can construct matrices that represent the angular
momentum operators. The matrix for Sz is diagonal with the eigenvalues
s, (s−1), . . ., −s down the diagonal. The matrices for Sx and Sy are evaluated
in the usual way from S+ and S−and so are zero apart from strips one
place above and below the diagonal. Using the relations (7.15) between the
coeﬃcients α±(m) of the raising and lowering operators S± we then ﬁnd
Sx = 1
2















0
α(s −1)
0
. . .
. . .
0
0
α(s −1)
0
α(s −2)
. . .
0
0
0
α(s −2)
0
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
0
α(s −2)
0
0
0
. . .
α(s −2)
0
α(s −1)
0
0
. . .
. . .
0
α(s −1)
0















= 1
2
h
α(m)δm,n−1 + α(m −1)δm,n+1
i
(7.127a)


166
Chapter 7: Angular Momentum
Figure 7.11 The points show the absolute values of the amplitudes am ≡⟨s, m, z|s, s, θ⟩
for s = 40 and, from left to right, θ = 120◦, 80◦, 30◦. For each value of θ, the vertical line
shows the value of cos θ.
Sy = 1
2i















0
α(s −1)
0
. . .
. . .
0
0
−α(s −1)
0
α(s −2)
. . .
0
0
0
−α(s −2)
0
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
0
α(s −2)
0
0
0
. . .
−α(s −2)
0
α(s −1)
0
0
. . .
. . .
0
−α(s −1)
0















= 1
2i
h
−α(m)δm,n−1 + α(m −1)δm,n+1
i
(7.127b)
Sz =












s
0
. . .
0
. . .
0
0
0
s −1
...
0
0
...
...
...
...
0
m
0
...
...
...
...
0
0
...
1 −s
0
0
0
. . .
0
. . .
0
−s












= m δmn,
(7.127c)
where the α(m) are what were called α+(m) in (7.15), and the rows and
columns of the matrix are labelled from +s at the top left to −s at the
bottom right. In the same way as for spins s = 1
2 and s = 1, it is straight-
forward (for a computer) to determine the amplitudes am ≡⟨s, m, z|s, s, θ⟩
for measuring Sz to have value m, given that n · S certainly returns value s
when n = (0, sin θ, cos θ) is inclined at angle θ to the z-axis. The points in
Figure 7.11 show the results of this calculation with s = 40 and three values
of θ. The amplitudes peak around the values of the ordinate, m = s cos θ,
that are marked with vertical lines. The larger the spin, the more sharply the
amplitudes are peaked around these lines, so for the extremely large values of
s that are characteristic of macroscopic systems, am is signiﬁcantly non-zero
only when m diﬀers negligibly from s cos θ. Hence, in the classical limit the
only values of Sz that have non-negligible probabilities of occurring lie in
a narrow range around s cos θ, which is just the projection of the classical
angular-momentum vector ⟨S⟩= sn onto the z-axis. That is, in the classical
limit the probability of measuring any individual value of Sz is small, but we
are certain to ﬁnd a value that lies close to the value predicted by classical
physics.


7.4 Spin
167
The classical picture implies that when the angular-momentum vector is
tipped in the yz plane at angle θ to the z axis, the value of Sy should be s sin θ.
So now for the eigenstate of n·S just described, we evaluate the expectation
value ⟨Sy⟩by ﬁrst multiplying the matrix for Sy on the column vector of
the amplitudes plotted in Figure 7.11, and then multiplying the resulting
vector by the row vector of the complex conjugates of the amplitudes. The
expectation value of Sy in this state is
⟨Sy⟩= a∗
m(Sy)mnan
= 1
2i
s
X
m,n=−s
a∗
m (α(m)δm,n−1 + α(m −1)δm,n+1) an
≃1
2i
s
X
m=−s
(α(m)a∗
mam+1 + α(m −1)a∗
mam−1) ,
(7.128)
bearing in mind that α(s) = α(−s −1) = 0. For a given value of θ, the
amplitudes plotted in Figure 7.11 lie on smooth curves so we can use the
approximation |am−1| ≃|am| ≃|am+1|. The phases of the am increase by
π/2 with successive values of m, so ⟨Sy⟩is real and the two terms (7.128)
add. Finally, we exploit the fact that |am| is small unless m ≃s cosθ and
use the approximation for large s, m that
α(m) =
p
s(s + 1) −m(m + 1) ≃
p
s2 −m2 ≃s sin θ.
(7.129)
Combining these approximations with the normalisation condition on the am
gives
⟨Sy⟩≃s sin θ
X
m
|am|2 = s sin θ
(7.130)
exactly as classical physics leads us to expect.
To determine the uncertainty in Sy we evaluate the expectation of S2
y.
From equation (7.127b) we ﬁnd that the matrix S2
y has elements
−1
4
s
X
p=−s

α(m)δm,p−1 + α(m −1)δm,p+1

α(p)δp,n−1 + α(p −1)δp,n+1

≃−1
4 {α(m)α(m + 1)δm,n−2 + α(m −1)α(m −3)δm,n+2
−
 α2(m) + α2(m −1)

δmn
	
,
(7.131)
where in going to the second line we have ignored corrections when m = ±s
because the amplitudes for these are negligible anyway.
Using the same
approximations as before, we now ﬁnd

S2
y

=
X
mn
a∗
m(S2
y)mnan ≃
X
m
α2(m)|am|2 ≃(s sin θ)2 X
m
|am|2
= s2 sin2 θ ≃⟨Sy⟩2 .
(7.132)
The uncertainty in Sy, being ∼
  
S2
y

−⟨Sy⟩2 1/2 is therefore negligible. A
similar calculation shows that both ⟨Sx⟩and

S2
x

vanish to good accuracy.
Thus in the classical limit it is normal for all three components of S to have
small uncertainties. However, it should be noted that Sy can be accurately
determined precisely because there is some uncertainty in Sz: our calculation
on ⟨Sy⟩depends crucially on there being several non-zero amplitudes am.
Quantum interference between states with diﬀerent values of Sz is responsible
for conﬁning the likely values of Sy to a narrow range.
This is the third time we have found that the familiar world re-emerges
through quantum interference between states in which some observable has


168
Chapter 7: Angular Momentum
well-deﬁned values: in §2.3.3 we found that bullets can be assigned posi-
tions and momenta simultaneously through interference between states of
well-deﬁned momentum, in §3.2 we saw that an excited oscillator moves as
a result of quantum interference between states of well-deﬁned energy, and
now we ﬁnd that a gyro has a well deﬁned orientation through quantum
interference between states of well-deﬁned angular momentum. In the clas-
sical regime a tiny fractional uncertainty in the value of an observable allows
the vast numbers of states to have non-negligible amplitudes, and interfer-
ence between these states narrowly deﬁnes the value of the variable that is
canonically conjugate to the observable (§2.3.1).
7.4.5 Precession in a magnetic ﬁeld
A compass needle swings to the Earth’s magnetic north pole because a mag-
netic dipole such as a compass needle experiences a torque when placed in a
magnetic ﬁeld. Similarly, a proton that is in a magnetic ﬁeld experiences a
torque because it is a magnetic dipole. However, its response to this torque
diﬀers from that of a compass needle because it is a spinning body; instead of
aligning with the magnetic ﬁeld, it precesses around the ﬁeld. This precession
forms the basis for nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) imaging, which has
become an enormously important diagnostic tool for chemistry and medicine.
The theory of NMR is a ﬁne example of the practical application of quantum
mechanics in general and spin operators in particular.
Classically, the potential energy of a magnetic dipole µ in a magnetic
ﬁeld B is
H = −µ · B,
(7.133)
where the minus sign ensures that a dipole aligns with the ﬁeld because this
is its lowest-energy conﬁguration. We align our coordinate system such that
the z axis lies along B and assume that the magnetic moment operator µ
is a constant 2µp times the spin operator s. Then the Hamiltonian operator
can be written
H = −2µpBsz.
(7.134)
The stationary states of this Hamiltonian are the eigenstates of sz, which for a
spin-half particle such as a proton are the states |±⟩in which a measurement
of sz is certain to yield ± 1
2; the energies of these states are
E± = ∓µpB.
(7.135)
The evolution in time of any spin state is
|ψ, t⟩= a−e−iE−t/¯h|−⟩+ a+e−iE+t/¯h|+⟩,
(7.136)
where the constant amplitudes a± specify the initial condition |ψ, 0⟩=
a−|−⟩+ a+|+⟩.
Suppose that initially a measurement of the spin parallel to n ≡(sin θ, 0, cosθ)
was certain to yield 1
2. Then from Problem 7.6 we have that a−= sin(θ/2)
and a+ = cos(θ/2). Hence at time t the proton’s state is
|ψ, t⟩= sin(θ/2)e−iE−t/¯h|−⟩+ cos(θ/2)e−iE+t/¯h|+⟩
= sin(θ/2)eiφ/2|−⟩+ cos(θ/2)e−iφ/2|+⟩,
(7.137a)
where
φ(t) = 2E+t
¯h
= ωt
where
ω = −2µpB
¯h
.
(7.137b)
But from Problem 7.6 this is just the state |+, n′⟩in which a measurement
of the spin parallel to n′ = (sin θ cos φ, sin θ sin φ cos θ) is certain to yield 1
2.
Consequently, the direction in which a measurement of the spin is certain to
yield 1
2 rotates around the direction of B at the frequency ω. This mirrors
the behaviour expected in classical physics of a magnetic dipole of magnitude


7.5 Addition of angular momenta
169
µp that has spin angular momentum 1
2¯h; its spin axis would precess around
B at angular frequency ω (Problem 7.12).
When material that contains chemically bound hydrogen atoms is im-
mersed in a powerful magnetic ﬁeld, most of the protons align their spins
with B in order to minimise their energy.
Radiation of frequency ω has
just the energy required kick a proton into the higher-energy state in which
its spin is anti-aligned with B. Consequently, such radiation is readily ab-
sorbed by a sample, whereas radiation of neighbouring frequencies is not.
As the analysis above shows, quantum interference between the aligned and
anti-aligned states causes the expectation value of the magnetic moment to
precesses at angular frequency ω, and the precessing magnetic moment cou-
ples resonantly to the imposed radiation ﬁeld.
The magnetic ﬁeld at the location of a proton in a molecule has a con-
tribution from the spins of the electrons that bind the proton, and this
contribution varies slightly from one location to another. For example, in
methanol, CH3OH, the magnetic ﬁeld experienced by the proton that is at-
tached to the oxygen atom diﬀers from those experienced by the protons that
are attached to the carbon atom, and the proton that is on the other side
of the carbon atom from the oxygen atom experiences a diﬀerent ﬁeld from
the protons that are adjacent to the oxygen atom. Since the frequency ω of
the resonant radiation is proportional to the magnitude of magnetic ﬁeld at
the location of the proton, methanol has three diﬀerent resonant frequencies
for a given magnitude of the imposed magnetic ﬁeld. Consequently, clues to
the chemical structure of a substance can be obtained by determining the
frequencies at which magnetic resonance occurs in a given imposed ﬁeld.
7.5 Addition of angular momenta
In practical applications of quantum mechanics we can often identify two
or more components of the system that each carry a well deﬁned amount
of angular momentum. For example, in a hydrogen atom both the proton
and the electron carry angular momentum 1
2¯h by virtue of their spins, and
a further quantity of angular momentum may be present in the orbit of the
electron around the proton. The total angular momentum of the atom is
the sum of these three contributions, so it is important to understand how
to add angular momenta in quantum mechanics. Once we understand how
to add two contributions, we’ll be able to add any number of contributions,
because we can add the third contribution to the result of adding the ﬁrst
two, and so on. Therefore in this section we focus the problem of adding the
angular momenta of two ‘gyros’, that is two systems that have unvarying total
angular momentum quantum number j but several possible orientations.
Imagine that we have two gyros in a box and that we know that the ﬁrst
gyro has total angular-momentum quantum number j1, while the second gyro
has total quantum number j2. Without loss of generality we may assume
j1 ≥j2. A ket describing the state of the ﬁrst gyro is of the form
|ψ1⟩=
j1
X
m=−j1
cm|j1, m⟩,
(7.138a)
while the state of the second is
|ψ2⟩=
j2
X
m=−j2
dm|j2, m⟩,
(7.138b)
and from the discussion in §6.1 it follows that the state of the box is
|ψ⟩= |ψ1⟩|ψ2⟩.
(7.139)


170
Chapter 7: Angular Momentum
The coeﬃcients cm and dm are the amplitudes to ﬁnd the individual gyros
in particular orientations with respect to the z axis. For example, if both
gyros are maximally aligned with the z axis, we will have |cj1| = |dj2| = 1
and cm1 = dm2 = 0 for m1̸ = j1 and m2̸ = j2.
The operators of interest are the operators J2
i , Jiz and Ji± of the ith
gyro and the corresponding operators of the box. The operators Jz and J±
for the box are simply sums of the corresponding operators for the gyros
Jz = J1z + J2z
;
J± = J1± + J2±.
(7.140)
Operators belonging to diﬀerent systems always commute, so [J1i, J2j] = 0
for any values of i, j.
The operator for the square of the box’s angular
momentum is
J2 = (J1 + J2)2 = J2
1 + J2
2 + 2J1.J2 .
(7.141)
Now
J1+J2−= (J1x + iJ1y)(J2x −iJ2y)
= (J1xJ2x + J1yJ2y) + i(J1yJ2x −J1xJ2y).
(7.142)
The expression for J1−J2+ can be obtained by swapping the labels 1 and 2,
so9
J1+J2−+ J1−J2+ + 2J1zJ2z = 2J1.J2 .
(7.143)
Using this expression to eliminate J1.J2 from (7.141) we obtain
J2 = J2
1 + J2
2 + J1+J2−+ J1−J2+ + 2J1zJ2z .
(7.144)
While the total angular momenta of the individual gyros are ﬁxed, that
of the box is variable because it depends on the mutual orientation of the
two gyros: if the latter are parallel, the squared angular momentum in the
box might be expected to have quantum number j1 + j2, while if they are
antiparallel, the box’s angular momentum might be expected to have quan-
tum number j1 −j2. We shall show that this conjecture is true by explicitly
calculating the values of the coeﬃcients cm and dm for which the box is in an
eigenstate of both J2 and Jz. We start by examining the state |j1, j1⟩|j2, j2⟩
in which both gyros are maximally aligned with the z axis. It is easy to see
that this object is an eigenket of Jz with eigenvalue j1 + j2. We use (7.144)
to show that it is also an eigenket of J2:
J2|j1, j1⟩|j2, j2⟩= (J2
1 + J2
2 + J1+J2−+ J1−J2+ + 2J1zJ2z)|j1, j1⟩|j2, j2⟩
= {j1(j1 + 1) + j2(j2 + 1) + 2j1j2}|j1, j1⟩|j2, j2⟩,
(7.145)
where we have used the equation Ji+|ji, ji⟩= 0, which follows from equation
(7.7). It is straightforward to show that the expression in curly brackets in
equation (7.145) equals j(j+1) with j = j1+j2. Hence |j1, j1⟩|j2, j2⟩satisﬁes
both the deﬁning equations of the state |j1 + j2, j1 + j2⟩and we may write
|j1 + j2, j1 + j2⟩= |j1, j1⟩|j2, j2⟩.
(7.146)
Now that we have found one mutual eigenket for the box of J2 and Jz
we can easily ﬁnd others by applying J−to reorient the angular momentum
of the box away from the z axis. Again setting j = j1 + j2 we evaluate the
two sides of the equation
J−|j, j⟩= (J1−+ J2−)|j1, j1⟩|j2, j2⟩.
(7.147)
Equation (7.7) enables us to rewrite the left side
J−|j, j⟩=
p
j(j + 1) −j(j −1) |j, j −1⟩=
p
2j |j, j −1⟩.
(7.148)
9 Recall that J1i commutes with J2j for all ij.


7.5 Addition of angular momenta
171
Figure 7.12 The left panel shows states obtained by adding a system of angular momen-
tum j2 = 1 to one with j1 = 2, while the right panel is for j1 = 1 and j2 = 1
2.
The right side of (7.147) becomes
p
j1(j1 + 1) −j1(j1 −1)|j1, j1 −1⟩|j2, j2⟩
+
p
j2(j2 + 1) −j2(j2 −1)|j1, j1⟩|j2, j2 −1⟩
=
p
2j1 |j1, j1 −1⟩|j2, j2⟩+
p
2j2 |j1, j1⟩|j2, j2 −1⟩.
(7.149)
Putting the two sides back together, we have
|j, j −1⟩=
s
j1
j |j1, j1 −1⟩|j2, j2⟩+
s
j2
j |j1, j1⟩|j2, j2 −1⟩.
(7.150)
A further application of J−to the left side of this equation and of J1−+ J2−
to the right side would produce an expression for |j, j −2⟩and so on.
Figure 7.12 helps to organise the results of this calculation. States of the
box with well deﬁned angular momentum are marked by dots. The radius
of each semi-circle is proportional to j′, where j′(j′ + 1) is the eigenvalue of
the kets with respect to J2. The height of each ket above the centre of the
circles is proportional to m. The left panel shows the case j1 = 2, j2 = 1,
while the right panel is for j1 = 1, j2 = 1
2. The scheme for constructing
eigenstates J2 and Jz that we have developed so far starts with the state at
the top and then uses J−to successively generate the states that lie on the
outermost semi-circle.
We now seek an expression for the state |j −1, j −1⟩that lies at the top
of the ﬁrst semicircle inwards. It is trivial to verify that |j1, m1⟩|j2, m2⟩is an
eigenket of Jz with eigenvalue (m1 + m2). We require m1 + m2 = j1 + j2 −1,
so either m1 = j1 −1 and m2 = j2, or m1 = j1 and m2 = j2 −1. Equation
(7.150) shows that |j, j −1⟩involves precisely these two cases, and must be
orthogonal to |j −1, j −1⟩because it has a diﬀerent eigenvalue with respect
to J2. So the ket we seek is the unique (up to an overall phase factor) linear
combination of the kets appearing in (7.150) that is orthogonal to the linear
combination that appears there. That is,
|j −1, j −1⟩=
s
j2
j |j1, j1 −1⟩|j2, j2⟩−
s
j1
j |j1, j1⟩|j2, j2 −1⟩.
(7.151)
All the kets |j −1, m⟩for m = j −2, . . ., which in Figure 7.12 lie on the ﬁrst
semicircle in, can be constructed by applying J−to this equation.
Similarly, |j−2, j−2⟩, which in Figure 7.12 lies at the top of the smallest
semicircle, will be a linear combination of |j1, j1−2⟩|j2, j2⟩, |j1, j1−1⟩|j2, j2−
1⟩and |j1, j1⟩|j2, j2 −2⟩and must be orthogonal to |j, j −2⟩and |j −1, j −2⟩,
which are known linear combinations of these states. Hence we can determine
which linear combination is required for |j −2, j −2⟩, and then generate the
remaining kets of the series |j −2, m⟩by applying J−to it.
On physical grounds we would expect the box’s smallest total angular
momentum quantum number to be j1 −j2, corresponding to the case in


172
Chapter 7: Angular Momentum
Table 7.4
Total numbers of states
j
Number of states
j1 + j2
2(j1 + j2) + 1
j1 + j2 −1
2(j1 + j2) + 1 −2
. . .
. . .
j1 −j2
2(j1 + j2) + 1 −4j2
Total
(2j1 + 1)(2j2 + 1)
Figure 7.13 Interpretation of Clebsch–
Gordan coeﬃcients in terms of vec-
tors. The full line has length
p
3(3 + 1)
and its vertical component has length
2. The dotted lines labelled j1 have
length
p
2(2 + 1) and vertical com-
ponents of length 2 and 1.
which the two gyros are antiparallel (recall that we have labelled the gyros
such that j1 ≥j2). Does this conjectured smallest value of j allow for the
correct number of basis states for the box? That is, will there be as many
basis states of the box as there are of the contents of the box? We can easily
evaluate the latter: there are 2j1 + 1 orientations of the ﬁrst gyro, and for
each of these orientations, the second gyro can be oriented in 2j2 + 1 ways.
So the box’s contents can be in (2j1 + 1)(2j2 + 1) basis states of the form
|j1, m1⟩|j2, m2⟩. The predicted number of basis states of the box is worked
out in Table 7.4. In the main part of the table, the number of states in each
row is two less than in the row above and there are 2j2 + 1 rows. The sum
at the bottom can be obtained by making a third column that is just the
second column in reverse order and noting that the sum of the numbers in
the second and third columns of a given row is then always 4j1 + 2. Hence
twice the sum of the numbers in the second column is 2j2 + 1 times 4j1 + 2.
Thus we do get the correct number of basis states if the smallest value of j
is j1 −j2.
The numbers
C(j, m; j1, j2, m1, m2) ≡⟨j, m|j1, m1⟩|j2, m2⟩
(7.152)
that we have been evaluating are called Clebsch–Gordan coeﬃcients. They
have a simple physical interpretation: C(j, m; j1, j2, m1, m2) is the amplitude
that, on opening the box when it’s in a state of well deﬁned angular momen-
tum, we will ﬁnd the ﬁrst and second gyros to be oriented with amounts m1
and m2 of their spins parallel to the z axis. For example, equation (7.151)
implies that C(3, 2; 2, 1, 1, 1) =
p
2/3, so if a box that contains a spin-two
gyro and a spin-one gyro has spin-three, there is a probability 2/3 that on
opening the box the second gyro will be maximally aligned with the z axis
and the second signiﬁcantly inclined, and only a probability 1/3 of ﬁnding
the reverse arrangement. These two possibilities are depicted by the lower
and upper dotted lines in Figure 7.13. The classical interpretation is that
the two gyros precess around the ﬁxed angular-momentum vector of the box,
and that the two conﬁgurations for which the Clebsch–Gordan coeﬃcients
give amplitudes are two of the states through which the precession carries the
system. This picture is intuitive and of some value, but should not be taken
too seriously. For one thing, the rules for adding angular momentum are
independent of any statement about the Hamiltonian, and therefore carry
no implication about the time evolution of the system. The gyros may or
may not precess, depending on whether they are dynamically coupled.


7.5 Addition of angular momenta
173
In §6.1 we saw that the physical signiﬁcance of the state of a composite
system, such as that formed by two gyros, being a linear combination of
product states such as |j1, m1⟩|j2, m2⟩is that the subsystems are correlated.
The Clebsch–Gordan coeﬃcients encode the correlations between the gyros
required for the box to have well-deﬁned angular momentum. If there is any
uncertainty in the orientation of either gyro, such correlations are essential
if the angular momentum of the box is to be well deﬁned: the angular mo-
mentum of the second gyro has to make up a pre-deﬁned total with whatever
value is measured for the ﬁrst gyro. This consideration explains why the only
states of the box that are simple products of states of the individual gyros are
|j1 + j2, j1 + j2⟩= |j1, j1⟩|j2, j2⟩and |j1 + j2, −(j1 + j2)⟩= |j1, −j1⟩|j2, −j2⟩
– so much angular momentum can be aligned with the z-axis only by each
gyro individually straining to align with the axis, and there is then no need
for the gyros to coordinate their eﬀorts.
7.5.1 Case of two spin-half systems
The general analysis we have just given will be clariﬁed by working out some
particular cases. We consider ﬁrst the case j1 = j2 = 1
2, which is relevant, for
example, to a hydrogen atom in its ground state, when all angular momentum
is contributed by the spins of the proton and the electron. The electron has
base states |±, e⟩in which Jz returns the value ± 1
2, while the proton has
corresponding base states |±, p⟩. Hence there are four states in all and j
takes just two values, 1 and 0.
Our construction of the states in which the atom has well-deﬁned angular
momentum starts with the state
|1, 1⟩= |+, e⟩|+, p⟩
(7.153)
in which both the electron and the proton have their spins maximally aligned
with the z axis. So the atom has maximum angular momentum, and its
angular momentum is maximally aligned with the z axis. Applying J−=
Je
−+ Jp
−to this ket we obtain
|1, 0⟩=
1
√2 (|−, e⟩|+, p⟩+ |+, e⟩|−, p⟩) .
(7.154)
The right side of this equation states that with the atom in this state, mea-
surements of Jz for the electron and proton are certain to ﬁnd that they
are ‘antiparallel’. This fact is surprising given that the left side states that
the atom has maximum angular momentum, so you would think that the
two particles had parallel angular momenta. The resolution of this paradox
is that the z components of the two spins are antiparallel, but the compo-
nents in the xy plane are parallel, although their direction is unknown to
us. Similarly, when the atom is in the state |1, 1⟩of equation (7.153), the
z components of the electron and proton angular momenta are parallel, but
the components in the xy plane are not well aligned. The poor alignment in
the xy plane explains why
√
J2 = √2 for the atom is less than √3, which is
the sum of
√
J2 =
p
3/4 for the electron and the proton.
When we apply J−to |1, 0⟩we obtain
|1, −1⟩= |−, e⟩|−, p⟩.
(7.155)
This equation conﬁrms the physically obvious fact that if we want to have
¯h of angular momentum pointing along the negative z axis, we need to have
the angular momenta of both the proton and the electron maximally aligned
with the negative z axis.
The remaining state of the atom is |0, 0⟩in which the atom has no angu-
lar momentum. This is the unique linear combination of the two compound
states on the right of equation (7.154) that is orthogonal to |1, 0⟩:
|0, 0⟩=
1
√2 (|−, e⟩|+, p⟩−|+, e⟩|−, p⟩) .
(7.156)


174
Chapter 7: Angular Momentum
The change of sign on the right of this equation from the right of equation
(7.154) for |1, 0⟩ensures that the spins of the electron and proton are antipar-
allel in the xy plane as well as along the z axis. We show this by rewriting
|1, 0⟩and |0, 0⟩in terms of the states in which the electron and proton have
well-deﬁned spin parallel to the x-axis. These states are
|x+, e⟩=
1
√2 (|+, e⟩+ |−, e⟩)
|x+, p⟩=
1
√2 (|+, p⟩+ |−, p⟩)
|x−, e⟩=
1
√2 (|+, e⟩−|−, e⟩)
|x−, p⟩=
1
√2 (|+, p⟩−|−, p⟩)
(7.157)
So
|0, 0⟩= |x+, e⟩⟨x+, e|0, 0⟩+ |x−, e⟩⟨x−, e|0, 0⟩
= 1
2|x+, e⟩(−|−, p⟩+ |+, p⟩) −1
2|x−, e⟩(|−, p⟩+ |+, p⟩)
= −1
√2 (|x+, e⟩|x−, p⟩+ |x−, e⟩|x+, p⟩) .
(7.158)
The last line states that when the atom is in the state |0, 0⟩we are indeed
guaranteed to ﬁnd the components of the spins of the electron and proton
parallel to x have opposite signs. An analogous calculation starting from
equation (7.154) yields (Problem 7.27)
|1, 0⟩=
1
√2 (|x+, e⟩|x+, p⟩−|x−, e⟩|x−, p⟩) ,
(7.159)
so when the atom is in the |1, 0⟩state the two particles have identical com-
ponents of spin along x .
Notice that all three states in which the atom has j = 1 are unchanged
if we swap the m values of the particles – that is, if we map |±, e⟩→|∓, e⟩
and the same for the proton states. The atomic atomic state with j = 0,
by contrast, changes sign under this interchange. This fact will prove to be
important when we consider systems with two electrons (such a helium) or
two protons (such as an H2 molecule).
7.5.2 Case of spin one and spin half
In the ﬁrst excited state of hydrogen, the electron can have total orbital
angular momentum quantum number l = 1. So we now consider how to
combine angular momentum j = 1 with the electron’s spin, j = 1
2. The total
angular momentum quantum number takes two values, j = 3
2 and j = 1
2 (see
Figure 7.12). We start with the state
| 3
2, 3
2⟩= |+⟩|1, 1⟩
(7.160)
in which the spin and orbital angular momenta are both maximally oriented
along the z axis. Applying J−= L−+ S−to this equation, we obtain
| 3
2, 1
2⟩=
q
1
3 |−⟩|1, 1⟩+
q
2
3 |+⟩|1, 0⟩.
(7.161)
The right side of this equation says that in this state of the atom, the electron
is twice as likely to be found with its spin up as down. A second application
of J−yields
| 3
2, −1
2⟩=
q
2
3 |−⟩|1, 0⟩+
q
1
3 |+⟩|1, −1⟩
(7.162)
as we would expect from the symmetry between up and down.
A ﬁnal
application of J−yields | 3
2, −3
2⟩= |−⟩|1, −1⟩as it must on physical grounds.


7.5 Addition of angular momenta
175
Figure 7.14 Classically the sum
vector J1 + J2 can line anywhere on
the sphere of radius |J2| around the
end of J1.
The state | 1
2, 1
2⟩is the linear combination of the states that appear in
the right of equation (7.161) that is orthogonal to | 3
2, 1
2⟩. Hence,
| 1
2, 1
2⟩=
q
2
3 |−⟩|1, 1⟩−
q
1
3 |+⟩|1, 0⟩.
(7.163)
In this atomic state, the electron’s spin is twice as likely to be down as up.
The last remaining state can be found by applying J−to equation (7.163).
It is
| 1
2, −1
2⟩=
q
1
3 |−⟩|1, 0⟩−
q
2
3 |+⟩|1, −1⟩.
(7.164)
7.5.3 The classical limit
In classical physics we identify angular momentum with the vector J ≡¯h ⟨J⟩,
and the angular momentum of the whole system is obtained by vectorially
adding the angular momenta J1 and J2 of the component parts. If θ is the
angle between these vectors, then
J 2 = J 2
1 + J 2
2 + 2J1J2 cos θ.
(7.165)
If nothing is known about the direction of J2 relative to J1, all points on a
sphere of radius J2 and centred on the end of J1 are equally likely locations
for the end of J2 (Figure 7.14). Consequently, the probability dP that θ lies
in the range (θ, θ + dθ) is proportional to the area of the band shown in the
ﬁgure. Quantitatively
dP = 1
2 sin θ dθ,
(7.166)
where the factor 1
2 ensures that
R
dP = 1. From equation (7.165) the change
in J when θ changes by dθ is given by
J dJ = −J1J2 sin θdθ.
(7.167)
Combining equations (7.166) and (7.167), we ﬁnd that the probability that
the total angular momentum lies in the interval (J , J + dJ ) is10
dP = J dJ
2J1J2
.
(7.168)
10 We discarded the minus sign in equation (7.167) because we require dP > 0 regardless
of whether J increases or decreases.


176
Problems
In quantum mechanics the fraction of states that have total angular-
momentum quantum number j is
f =
2j + 1
(2j1 + 1)(2j2 + 1),
(7.169)
which in the classical limit of large quantum numbers becomes approximately
j/(2j1j2).
If all states were equally likely, this fraction would equal the
classical probability that J ≃j¯h lay within ¯h of j¯h. It is easy to check
from (7.167) that dP does indeed take the value f when we insert Ji = ¯hji
and dJ = ¯h. Thus from consistency with classical mechanics we are led
to the principle of equal a priori probability, namely that when we
have no information relevant to an upcoming measurement, we assign equal
probabilities to the system being in each state of whatever basis we have
decided to work in. This principle is the foundation of all statistical physics.
Problems
7.1
Show that ⟨j, j|Jx|j, j⟩= ⟨j, j|Jy|j, j⟩= 0 and that ⟨j, j|(J2
x+J2
y)|j, j⟩=
j. Discuss the implications of these results for the uncertainty in the orien-
tation of the classical angular momentum vector J for both small and large
values of j.
7.2
In the rotation spectrum of 12C16O the line arising from the transition
l = 4 →3 is at 461.04077 GHz, while that arising from l = 36 →35 is at
4115.6055 GHz. Show from these data that in a non-rotating CO molecule
the intra-nuclear distance is s ≃0.113 nm, and that the electrons provide
a spring between the nuclei that has force constant ∼1904 N m−1. Hence
show that the vibrational frequency of CO should lie near 6.47 × 1013 Hz
(measured value is 6.43 × 1013 Hz).
Hint: show from classical mechanics
that the distance of O from the centre of mass is 3
7s and that the molecule’s
moment of inertia is 48
7 mps2. Recall also the classical relation L = Iω.
7.3
Show that Li commutes with x · p and thus also with scalar functions
of x and p.
7.4
Write down the expression for the commutator [σi, σj] of two Pauli
matrices. Show that the anticommutator of two Pauli matrices is
{σi, σj} = 2δij.
(7.170)
7.5
Let n be any unit vector and σ = (σx, σy, σz) be the vector whose
components are the Pauli matrices. Why is it physically necessary that n · σ
satisfy (n · σ)2 = I, where I is the 2 × 2 identity matrix?
Let m be a
unit vector such that m · n = 0. Why do we require that the commutator
[m · σ, n · σ] = 2i(m × n) · σ? Prove that that these relations follow from the
algebraic properties of the Pauli matrices. You should be able to show that
[m · σ, n · σ] = 2i(m × n) · σ for any two vectors n and m.
7.6
Let n be the unit vector in the direction with polar coordinates (θ, φ).
Write down the matrix n · σ and ﬁnd its eigenvectors. Hence show that the
state of a spin-half particle in which a measurement of the component of spin
along n is certain to yield 1
2¯h is
|+, n⟩= sin(θ/2) eiφ/2|−⟩+ cos(θ/2) e−iφ/2|+⟩,
(7.171)
where |±⟩are the states in which ± 1
2 is obtained when sz is measured.
Obtain the corresponding expression for |−, n⟩. Explain physically why the
amplitudes in (7.171) have modulus 2−1/2 when θ = π/2 and why one of the
amplitudes vanishes when θ = π.


Problems
177
7.7
For a spin-half particle at rest, the rotation operator J is equal to the
spin operator S. Use the result of Problem 7.4 to show that in this case the
rotation operator U(α) ≡exp(−iα · J) is
U(α) = I cos
α
2

−iˆα · σ sin
α
2

,
(7.172)
where ˆα is the unit vector parallel to α. Comment on the value this gives
for U(α) when α = 2π.
7.8
Write down the 3 × 3 matrix that represents Sx for a spin-one system
in the basis in which Sz is diagonal (i.e., the basis states are |0⟩and |±⟩with
Sz|+⟩= |+⟩, etc.)
A beam of spin-one particles emerges from an oven and enters a Stern–
Gerlach ﬁlter that passes only particles with Jz = ¯h. On exiting this ﬁlter,
the beam enters a second ﬁlter that passes only particles with Jx = ¯h, and
then ﬁnally it encounters a ﬁlter that passes only particles with Jz = −¯h.
What fraction of the particles stagger right through?
7.9∗
Repeat the analysis of Problem 7.8 for spin-one particles coming on
ﬁlters aligned successively along +z, 45◦from z towards x [i.e. along (1,0,1)],
and along x.
Use classical electromagnetic theory to determine the outcome in the
case that the spin-one particles were photons and the ﬁlters were polaroid.
Why do you get a diﬀerent answer?
7.10
A system that has spin momentum √6¯h is rotated through an angle φ
around the z axis. Write down the 5 × 5 matrix that updates the amplitudes
am that Sz will take the value m.
7.11
Justify physically the claim that the Hamiltonian of a particle that
precesses in a magnetic ﬁeld B can be written
H = −2µs · B.
(7.173)
In a coordinate system oriented such that the z axis is parallel to B, a
proton is initially in the eigenstate |+, x⟩of sx. Obtain expressions for the
expectation values of sx and sy at later times. Explain the physical content
of your expressions.
Bearing in mind that a rotating magnetic ﬁeld must be a source of
radiation, do you expect your expressions to remain valid to arbitrarily late
times? What really happens in the long run?
7.12
Show that a classical top with spin angular momentum S which is
subject to a torque G = µS×B/|S| precesses at angular velocity ω = µB/|S|.
Explain the relevance of this calculation to magnetic resonance imaging in
general and equation (7.137b) in particular.
7.13∗
Write a computer programme that determines the amplitudes am in
|n; s, s⟩=
s
X
m=−s
am|s, m⟩
where n = (sin θ, 0, cos θ) with θ any angle and |n; s, s⟩is the ket that solves
the equation (n · S)|n; s, s⟩= s|n; s, s⟩. Explain physically the nature of this
state.
Use your am to evaluate the expectation values ⟨Sx⟩and

S2
x

for this
state and hence show that the rms ﬂuctuation in measurements of Sx will
be
p
s/2 cos θ.


178
Problems
7.14∗
We have that
L+ ≡Lx + iLy = eiφ ∂
∂θ + i cot θ ∂
∂φ

.
(7.174)
From the Hermitian nature of Lz = −i∂/∂φ we infer that derivative operators
are anti-Hermitian. So using the rule (AB)† = B†A† on equation (7.174),
we infer that
L−≡L†
+ =

−∂
∂θ + i ∂
∂φ cot θ

e−iφ.
This argument and the result it leads to is wrong. Obtain the correct result
by integrating by parts
R
dθ sin θ
R
dφ (f ∗L+g), where f and g are arbitrary
functions of θ and φ. What is the fallacy in the given argument?
7.15∗
By writing ¯h2L2 = (x×p)·(x×p) = P
ijklm ǫijkxjpk ǫilmxlpm show
that
p2 = ¯h2L2
r2
+ 1
r2

(r · p)2 −i¯hr · p
	
.
(7.175)
By showing that p · ˆr −ˆr · p = −2i¯h/r, obtain r · p = rpr + i¯h. Hence obtain
p2 = p2
r + ¯h2L2
r2 .
(7.176)
Give a physical interpretation of one over 2m times this equation.
7.16
The angular part of a system’s wavefunction is
⟨θ, φ|ψ⟩∝(√2 cos θ + sin θe−iφ −sin θeiφ).
What are the possible results of measurement of (a) L2, and (b) Lz, and
their probabilities? What is the expectation value of Lz?
7.17
A system’s wavefunction is proportional to sin2 θ e2iφ. What are the
possible results of measurements of (a) Lz and (b) L2?
7.18
A system’s wavefunction is proportional to sin2 θ. What are the pos-
sible results of measurements of (a) Lz and (b) L2? Give the probabilities of
each possible outcome.
7.19
Consider a stationary state |E, l⟩of a free particle of mass m that has
angular-momentum quantum number l. Show that Hl|E, l⟩= E|E, l⟩, where
Hl ≡
1
2m

p2
r + l(l + 1)¯h2
r2

.
(7.177)
Give a physical interpretation of the two terms in the big bracket. Show that
Hl = A†
l Al, where
Al ≡
1
√
2m

ipr −(l + 1)¯h
r

.
(7.178)
Show that [Al, A†
l ] = Hl+1 −Hl. What is the state Al|E, l⟩? Show that for
E > 0 there is no upper bound on the angular momentum. Interpret this
result physically.
7.20∗
Show that [Ji, Lj] = i P
k ǫijkLk and [Ji, L2] = 0 by eliminating Li
using its deﬁnition L = ¯h−1x × p, and then using the commutators of Ji
with x and p.


Problems
179
7.21∗
In this problem you show that many matrix elements of the position
operator x vanish when states of well deﬁned l, m are used as basis states.
These results will lead to selection rules for electric dipole radiation. First
show that [L2, xi] = i P
jk ǫjik(Ljxk + xkLj). Then show that L · x = 0 and
using this result derive
[L2, [L2, xi]] = i
X
jk
ǫjik
 Lj[L2, xk] + [L2, xk]Lj

= 2(L2xi + xiL2). (7.179)
By squeezing this equation between angular-momentum eigenstates ⟨l, m|
and |l′, m′⟩show that
0 =

(β −β′)2 −2(β + β′)
	
⟨l, m|xi|l′, m′⟩,
where β ≡l(l + 1) and β′ = l′(l′ + 1). By equating the factor in front of
⟨l, m|xi|l′, m′⟩to zero, and treating the resulting equation as a quadratic
equation for β given β′, show that ⟨l, m|xi|l′, m′⟩must vanish unless l + l′ =
0 or l = l′ ± 1. Explain why the matrix element must also vanish when
l = l′ = 0.
7.22∗
Show that l excitations can be divided amongst the x, y or z oscilla-
tors of a three-dimensional harmonic oscillator in ( 1
2l+1)(l+1) ways. Verify
in the case l = 4 that this agrees with the number of states of well deﬁned
angular momentum and the given energy.
7.23∗
Let
Al ≡
1
√
2m¯hω

ipr −(l + 1)¯h
r
+ mωr

.
(7.180)
be the ladder operator of the three-dimensional harmonic oscillator and |E, l⟩
be the oscillator’s stationary state of energy E and angular-momentum quan-
tum number l. Show that if we write Al|E, l⟩= α−|E −¯hω, l + 1⟩, then
α−=
√
L −l, where L is the angular-momentum quantum number of a cir-
cular orbit of energy E. Show similarly that if A†
l−1|E, l⟩= α+|E+¯hω, l−1⟩,
then α+ =
√
L −l + 2.
7.24∗
Show that the probability distribution in radius of a particle that
orbits in the three-dimensional harmonic-oscillator potential on a circular
orbit with angular-momentum quantum number l peaks at r/ℓ=
p
2(l + 1),
where
ℓ≡
r
¯h
2mω.
(7.181)
Derive the corresponding classical result.
7.25∗
A particle moves in the three-dimensional harmonic oscillator poten-
tial with the second largest angular-momentum quantum number possible at
its energy. Show that the radial wavefunction is
u1 ∝xl

x −2l + 1
x

e−x2/4
where
x ≡r/ℓ
with
ℓ≡
r
¯h
2mω.
(7.182)
How many radial nodes does this wavefunction have?
7.26
A box containing two spin-one gyros A and B is found to have angular-
momentum quantum numbers j = 2, m = 1. Determine the probabilities
that when Jz is measured for gyro A, the values m = ±1 and 0 will be
obtained.
What is the value of the Clebsch–Gordan coeﬃcient C(2, 1; 1, 1, 1, 0)?


180
Problems
7.27
The angular momentum of a hydrogen atom in its ground state is
entirely due to the spins of the electron and proton. The atom is in the state
|1, 0⟩in which it has one unit of angular momentum but none of it is parallel
to the z-axis. Express this state as a linear combination of products of the
spin states |±, e⟩and |±, p⟩of the proton and electron. Show that the states
|x±, e⟩in which the electron has well-deﬁned spin along the x-axis are
|x±, e⟩=
1
√2 (|+, e⟩± |−, e⟩) .
(7.183)
By writing
|1, 0⟩= |x+, e⟩⟨x+, e|1, 0⟩+ |x−, e⟩⟨x−, e|1, 0⟩,
(7.184)
express |1, 0⟩as a linear combination of the products |x±, e⟩|x±, p⟩. Explain
the physical signiﬁcance of your result.
7.28∗
The interaction between neighbouring spin-half atoms in a crystal is
described by the Hamiltonian
H = K
S(1) · S(2)
a
−3(S(1) · a)(S(2) · a)
a3

,
(7.185)
where K is a constant, a is the separation of the atoms and S(1) is the ﬁrst
atom’s spin operator. Explain what physical idea underlies this form of H.
Show that S(1)
x S(2)
x +S(1)
y S(2)
y
= 1
2(S(1)
+ S(2)
−+S(1)
−S(2)
+ ). Show that the mutual
eigenkets of the total spin operators S2 and Sz are also eigenstates of H and
ﬁnd the corresponding eigenvalues.
At time t = 0 particle 1 has its spin parallel to a, while the other
particle’s spin is antiparallel to a. Find the time required for both spins to
reverse their orientations.


8
Hydrogen
Wherever we look, down at ourselves or up into the vastness of the Uni-
verse, what we see are atoms. The way atoms interact with themselves and
with electromagnetic radiation structures the world about us, giving colour,
texture, solidity or ﬂuidity to all things, both alive and inanimate. In the
wider Universe the way visible matter has aggregated into stars and galaxies
is determined by the interplay between atoms and radiation. In the last two
decades of the twentieth century it emerged that atoms do not really domi-
nate the Universe; on large scales they are rather like icing on the cake. But
they certainly dominate planet Earth, and, like the icing, they are all we can
see of the cosmic cake.
Besides the inherent interest of atomic structure, there is the histori-
cal fact that the formative years of quantum mechanics were dominated by
experimental investigations of atomic structure. Most of the principles of
the subject were developed to explain atomic phenomena, and the stature of
these phenomena in the minds of physicists was greatly enhanced through
the rˆole they played in revolutionising physics.
It is an unfortunate fact that atoms are complex systems that are not
easily modelled to a precision as good as that with which they are commonly
measured. The complexity of an atom increases with the number of electrons
that it contains, both because the electrons interact with one another as well
as with the nucleus, and because the more electrons there are, the higher
the nuclear charge and the faster electrons can move. By the middle of the
periodic table the speeds of the fastest electrons are approaching the speed
of light and relativistic eﬀects are important.
In this chapter we develop a model of the simplest atom, hydrogen,
that accounts for most, but not all, measurements. In Chapter 10 we will
take the ﬁrst steps towards a model of the second most complex atom, he-
lium, and indicate general trends in atomic properties as one proceeds down
the periodic table. The ideas we use will depend heavily on the model of
hydrogen-like systems that is developed in this chapter. With these appli-
cations in view, we generalise from hydrogen to a hydrogen-like ion, in
which a single electron is bound to a nucleus of charge Ze.


182
Chapter 8: Hydrogen
8.1 Gross structure of hydrogen
We start with a rather crude model of a hydrogen-like ion. In this model
neither the electron nor the nucleus has a spin, and the electron moves non-
relativistically under purely electrostatic forces. The structure of an atom or
ion that is obtained using these approximations is called its gross structure.
The approximations make it easy to write down the model Hamiltonian be-
cause they include just three contributions to the energy: the kinetic energies
of the nucleus and the electron, and the bodies’ electrostatic binding energy:
H =
p2
n
2mn
+ p2
e
2me
−
Ze2
4πǫ0|xe −xn|,
(8.1)
where xe and xn are the position operators of the electron and the nucleus,
respectively, and pe and pn are the corresponding momentum operators. We
wish to solve the eigenvalue equation H|E⟩= E|E⟩for this Hamiltonian.
In the position representation, the momentum operators become derivative
operators, and the eigenvalue equation becomes a partial diﬀerential equation
in six variables
Eψ(xn, xe) = −¯h2
2mn
∇2
nψ −¯h2
2me
∇2
eψ −
Ze2ψ
4πǫ0|xe −xn|,
(8.2)
where a subscript e or n on ∇implies the use of derivatives with respect to the
components of xe or xn. Remarkably, we can solve this frightening equation
exactly. The key step is to introduce six new variables, the components of
X ≡mexe + mnxn
me + mn
and
r ≡xe −xn.
(8.3)
X is the location of the ion’s centre of mass, and r is the vector from the
nucleus to the electron. The chain rule yields
∂
∂xe
= ∂X
∂xe
· ∂
∂X + ∂r
∂xe
· ∂
∂r =
me
me + mn
∂
∂X + ∂
∂r.
(8.4)
When we take the dot product of each side with itself, we ﬁnd
∇2
e =

me
me + mn
2
∇2
X + ∇2
r +
2me
me + mn
∂2
∂X · ∂r,
(8.5a)
where the subscripts X and r imply that the operator is to be made up of
derivatives with respect to the components of X or r. Similarly
∇2
n =

mn
me + mn
2
∇2
X + ∇2
r −
2mn
me + mn
∂2
∂X · ∂r.
(8.5b)
We now add m−1
e
times equation (8.5a) to m−1
n
times equation (8.5b). The
mixed derivatives cancel leaving
m−1
e ∇2
e + m−1
n ∇2
n =
1
me + mn
∇2
X + 1
µ∇2
r,
(8.6a)
where
µ ≡
memn
me + mn
(8.6b)
is called the reduced mass of the electron. In the case of hydrogen, when
mn = mp = 1836me, the reduced mass diﬀers very little from me (µ =
0.99945me), and in heavier hydrogen-like ions the value of µ lies even closer
to me.


8.1 Gross structure
183
Figure 8.1 The eﬀective potential
(8.13) for Z = 1 and (from bottom
to top) l = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4.
When we use equation (8.6a) to replace xe and xn in equation (8.2) by
r and X, we obtain
Eψ = −
¯h2
2(me + mn)∇2
Xψ −¯h2
2µ∇2
rψ −Ze2
4πǫ0rψ.
(8.7)
The right side breaks into two parts: the ﬁrst term is the Hamiltonian HK of
a free particle of mass me + mn, while the second and third terms make up
the Hamiltonian Hr of a particle of mass µ that is attracted to the origin by
an inverse-square law force. Since HK and Hr commute with one another,
there is a complete set of mutual eigenkets. In §6.1.2 we showed (page 109)
that in these circumstances we can assume that ψ is a product
ψ(xe, xn) = K(X)ψr(r),
(8.8)
where
−
¯h2
2(me + mn)∇2
XK = EKK
(8.9)
and
−¯h2
2µ∇2
rψr −Ze2ψr
4πǫ0r = Erψr.
(8.10)
Here EK and Er are two distinct eigenvalues and their sum is the ion’s total
energy, E = EK + Er.
From §2.3.3 we know all about the dynamics of a free particle, so equa-
tion (8.9) need not detain us.
We have to solve equation (8.10).
In the
interests of simplicity we henceforth omit the subscript Er.
Equation (7.69) enables us to write the kinetic energy term in equation
(8.10) in terms of the radial momentum operator pr and the total orbital
angular momentum operator L2.
Equation (8.10) is then the eigenvalue
equation of the Hamiltonian
H ≡p2
r
2µ + ¯h2L2
2µr2 −Ze2
4πǫ0r.
(8.11)
L2 commutes with H since the only occurrence in H of the angles θ and φ
is in L2 itself. So there is a complete set of mutual eigenstates |E, l, m⟩of
H, L2 and Lz such that L2|E, l, m⟩= l(l + 1)|E, l, m⟩. For these kets the
operator H of equation (8.11) is equivalent to the radial Hamiltonian
Hl ≡p2
r
2µ + l(l + 1)¯h2
2µr2
−Ze2
4πǫ0r .
(8.12)


184
Chapter 8: Hydrogen
The operator (8.12) is the Hamiltonian for a particle that moves in one
dimension in the eﬀective potential
Veﬀ(r) ≡l(l + 1)¯h2
2µr2
−Ze2
4πǫ0r .
(8.13)
The ﬁrst term in this expression is the kinetic energy that conservation of
angular momentum requires in tangential motion, while the second term is
the electrostatic potential energy. Veﬀis plotted in Figure 8.1 for l = 0, . . . , 4.
The radial Hamiltonian Hl governs the oscillations of the reduced mass
around the minimum for Veﬀ. By astute exploitation of natural coordinates
and symmetry we have reduced our original intimidating Hamiltonian (8.1),
which contained twelve operators, to a Hamiltonian Hl that contains only
two operators. The eigenkets of the Hamiltonian Hr for the internal struc-
ture of the ion are products of the eigenkets |E, l⟩of Hl and eigenkets |l, m⟩
of L2 and Lz:
|E, l, m⟩= |E, l⟩|l, m⟩.
(8.14)
Hl is strikingly similar to the radial Hamiltonian deﬁned by equation
(7.81) for which we solved the eigenvalue problem in the course of our study
of the three-dimensional harmonic oscillator. We use essentially the same
technique now, deﬁning the dimensionless ladder operator
Al ≡a0
√2
 i
¯hpr −l + 1
r
+
Z
(l + 1)a0

,
(8.15a)
where we have identiﬁed the Bohr radius1
a0 ≡4πǫ0¯h2
µe2
.
(8.15b)
The product of Al with A†
l is
A†
l Al = a2
0
2

−i
¯hpr +
Z
(l + 1)a0
−l + 1
r
  i
¯hpr +
Z
(l + 1)a0
−l + 1
r

= a2
0
2
(
p2
r
¯h2 +

Z
(l + 1)a0
−l + 1
r
2
+ i
¯h

pr, l + 1
r
)
.
(8.16)
Equations (2.25) and (7.67) enable us to evaluate the commutator in this
expression, so we have
A†
l Al = a2
0
2
 p2
r
¯h2 +
Z2
(l + 1)2a2
0
+ (l + 1)2
r2
−2Z
a0r −i
¯h
l + 1
r2 [pr, r]

= a2
0
2
 p2
r
¯h2 + l(l + 1)
r2
−2Z
a0r +
Z2
(l + 1)2a2
0

= a2
0µ
¯h2 Hl +
Z2
2(l + 1)2 .
(8.17)
If we evaluated the product AlA†
l , the sign in front of the commutator in the
ﬁrst line of equation (8.17) would be reversed, so we would ﬁnd
AlA†
l = a2
0µ
¯h2 Hl+1 +
Z2
2(l + 1)2 .
(8.18)
1 The physical signiﬁcance of a0 is clariﬁed by rewriting equation (8.15b) in the form
e2/(4πǫ0a0) = (¯h/a0)2/µ. The left side is the electrostatic potential energy at a0 and
the right side is twice the kinetic energy of zero-point motion (§3.1) of a particle whose
position has uncertainty ∼a0. For hydrogen a0 = 5.29177 × 10−11 m.


8.1 Gross structure
185
Taking equation (8.17) from equation (8.18) we obtain the commutator
[Al, A†
l ] = a2
0µ
¯h2 (Hl+1 −Hl),
(8.19)
a result that recalls equation (7.88) for the three-dimensional harmonic os-
cillator.
It is useful to rewrite equation (8.17) in the form
Hl = ¯h2
µa2
0

A†
l Al −
Z2
2(l + 1)2

.
(8.20)
Commuting each side of this equation with Al and using equation (8.19), we
obtain an expression for the commutator of Hl with Al:
[Al, Hl] = ¯h2
µa2
0
[Al, A†
l Al] = ¯h2
µa2
0
[Al, A†
l ]Al = (Hl+1 −Hl)Al.
(8.21)
This equation simpliﬁes to
AlHl = Hl+1Al.
(8.22)
We show that Al is a ladder operator by multiplying it into both sides
of the eigenvalue equation Hl|E, l⟩= E|E, l⟩and using equation (8.22):
EAl|E, l⟩= AlHl|E, l⟩= Hl+1Al|E, l⟩.
(8.23)
This equation states that Al|E, l⟩is an eigenket of Hl+1 with eigenvalue E.
That is, Al transfers energy from the electron’s radial motion to its tangential
motion. If we repeat this process by multiplying Al|E, l⟩by Al+1, and so on,
we will eventually arrive at a circular orbit. Let L(E) denote the l value of
this orbit. Then AL must annihilate |E, L⟩because, if it did not, we would
have a state with even greater angular momentum.
Thus with equation
(8.17) we can write
0 = |AL|E, L⟩|2 = ⟨E, L|A†
LAL|E, L⟩= a2
0µ
¯h2 E +
Z2
2(L + 1)2 .
(8.24)
That is,
E = −Z2¯h2
2µa2
0n2 = −
Z2e2
8πǫ0a0n2 = −
Z2µe4
2n2(4πǫ0¯h)2 ,
(8.25)
where we have deﬁned the principal quantum number n ≡L+ 1 and the
second equality uses the deﬁnition (8.15b) of the Bohr radius. The Rydberg
constant R is
R ≡
¯h2
2µa2
0
=
e2
8πǫ0a0
= 1
2µ

e2
4πǫ0¯h
2
= 13.6056923 eV,
(8.26)
where µ = memp/(me+mp) is the reduced mass in the case of hydrogen. The
Rydberg constant enables us to give a compact expression for the permitted
values of E and l in hydrogen
E = −R
n2
(n = 1, 2, . . .)
;
0 ≤l ≤n −1 .
(8.27)
Henceforth we use n rather than E to label kets and wavefunctions. Thus
|n, l, m⟩= |n, l⟩|l, m⟩(cf. eq. 8.14) is the stationary state of a hydrogen-like
ion for the energy given by (8.25) and the stated angular-momentum quan-
tum numbers. The ground state is |1, 0, 0⟩. The energy level immediately
above the ground state is four-fold degenerate, being spanned by the states
|2, 0, 0⟩, |2, 1, 0⟩and |2, 1, ±1⟩. The second excited energy level is 9-fold de-
generate, and so on.
This property of our model hydrogen atom, that it has states with dif-
ferent l but the same energy, is unusual and reﬂects a hidden symmetry of
our model – see Appendix F for details. Atoms with more than one electron
have energy levels that depend explicitly on l even when spin and relativity
are neglected. When our model of hydrogen is upgraded to include spin and
relativity, E becomes weakly dependent on l.


186
Chapter 8: Hydrogen
Figure 8.2 Schematic diagram of
the Lyman, Balmer and Paschen se-
ries of spectral lines in the spectrum
of hydrogen.
8.1.1 Emission-line spectra
A hydrogen atom may change its value of n to a smaller value n′, releasing
the liberated energy as a photon of frequency ν = (En −En′)/h. Hence the
emission spectrum of hydrogen contains lines at the frequencies
ν = R
h
 1
n′2 −1
n2

.
(8.28)
The lines associated with a given lower level n′ form a series of lines of
increasing frequency and decreasing wavelength. The series associated with
n′ = 1 is called the Lyman series, the longest-wavelength member of which
is the Lyman α line at 121.5 nm, followed by the Lyβ line at 102.5 nm,
and so on up to the series limit at 91.2 nm.
The series associated with
n′ = 2 is called the Balmer series and starts with a line called Hα at
656.2 nm and continues with Hβ at 486.1 nm towards the series limit at
364.6 nm. The series associated with n′ = 3 is the Paschen series, and
that associated with n′ = 4 is the Brackett series. Figure 8.2 shows the
ﬁrst three series schematically. Historically the discovery in 1885 by Johann
Balmer (1825–1898), a Swiss schoolmaster, that the principal lines in the
optical spectrum of hydrogen could be ﬁtted by equation (8.28), was crucial
for the development of Niels Bohr’s model atom of 1913, which was the
precursor of the current quantum theory (Problem 8.3).
Equation (8.25) states that, for given n, the energy of an electron scales
as Z2. For a many–electron atom electromagnetic interactions between the
electrons invalidate this scaling. However, it holds to a fair approximation
for electrons that have the smallest values of n because these electrons are
trapped in the immediate vicinity of the nucleus and their dynamics is largely
unaﬀected by the presence of electrons at larger radii. Henry Moseley (1887–
1915) studied the frequencies of X-rays given oﬀwhen atoms were bombarded
by free electrons. He showed2 that the frequencies of similar spectral lines
from diﬀerent elements seemed to scale with the square of the atomic number.
At that time the periodic table was something constructed by chemists that
lacked a solid physical foundation. In particular, the atomic numbers of some
elements were incorrectly assigned. Moseley’s experiments led to the order
of cobalt and nickel being reversed, and correctly predicted that elements
with atomic numbers 43, 61, 72, 75, 87 and 91 would be discovered.
8.1.2 Radial eigenfunctions
The wavefunctions of hydrogen-like ions are not only important for exper-
iments with atoms and ions that have only one electron, but are also the
building blocks from which models of many-electron atoms are built.
The ﬁrst step in ﬁnding any radial eigenfunction for a hydrogen-like ion
is to write the equation An−1|n, n−1⟩= 0 (eq. 8.24) as a diﬀerential equation
for the radial wavefunction of the circular orbit with angular-momentum
2 Moseley, H.G.J., 1913, Phil. Mag., 27, 703.
The lines studied by Moseley were
associated with transitions n = 2 →1.


8.1 Gross structure
187
Figure 8.3 The radial wavefunctions un−1
n
(r) of “circular” orbits for n = 1, 2 and 3.
quantum number l = n −1. From equations (8.15a) and (7.66) we need to
solve
∂
∂run−1
n
+

−n −1
r
+ Z
na0

un−1
n
= 0,
(8.29)
where
ul
n(r) ≡⟨r|n, l⟩.
(8.30)
Equation (8.29) is a ﬁrst-order linear diﬀerential equation. Its integrating
factor is
exp
Z
dr

−n −1
r
+ Z
na0

= r−(n−1)eZr/na0,
(8.31)
so the required eigenfunction is
un−1
n
(r) = Crn−1e−Zr/na0,
(8.32)
where C is a normalising constant.
This wavefunction is very similar to
our expression (7.97) for the wavefunction of a circular orbit in the three-
dimensional harmonic oscillator potential – the only diﬀerence is that the
Gaussian function has been replaced by a simple exponential. The scale-
length in the exponential is (n/Z)a0, so it increases with energy and decreases
with the nuclear charge. This makes perfect sense physically because it states
that more energetic electrons can go further from a given nucleus, and that
nuclei with higher electric charge will bind their (innermost) electrons more
tightly.
We choose the normalising constant C in equation (8.32) to ensure that
the complete wavefunction (eq. 8.14)
⟨r, θ, φ|(|E, l⟩|l, m⟩) = ⟨r|n, l⟩⟨θ, φ|l, m⟩= ul
n(r)Ym
l (θ, φ)
(8.33)
is correctly normalised.
Bearing in mind that d3x = r2dr d2Ωand that
R d2Ω|Ym
l |2 = 1, we ﬁnd that C must satisfy
1 = C2
Z ∞
0
dr r2ne−2Zr/na0 = C2 na0
2Z
2n+1 Z ∞
0
dρ ρ2ne−ρ
= C2 na0
2Z
2n+1
(2n)!,
(8.34)
where we have evaluated the integral with the aid of Box 8.1. The correctly
normalised radial wavefunction is therefore
un−1
n
(r) =
1
p
(2n)!
 2Z
na0
3/2 2Zr
na0
n−1
e−Zr/na0.
(8.35)
These functions are plotted for n = 1 −3 in Figure 8.3. For n > 1 the
wavefunction rises from zero at the origin to a peak at r = n(n−1)a0/Z and
from there falls exponentially with increasing r.


188
Chapter 8: Hydrogen
Figure 8.4 The probability of ﬁnd-
ing the electron of a hydrogen atom
that is in its ground state at a ra-
dius greater than r. Radii greater
than 2a0/Z are classically forbidden.
Box 8.1:
The factorial function
We often encounter the integral Γ(α + 1) ≡
R ∞
0
dt tαe−t. Integrating by
parts we ﬁnd that
Γ(α + 1) = −

tαe−t∞
0 + α
Z ∞
0
dt tα−1e−t
= αΓ(α).
It is easy to check that Γ(1) = 1. Putting α = 1 in the last equation it
follows that Γ(2) = 1. Setting α = 2 we ﬁnd Γ(3) = 2, and repeating
this process we see that for any integer n, Γ(n+1) = n!. We can use this
result to deﬁne the factorial function by
z! ≡Γ(z + 1) =
Z ∞
0
dt tze−t.
(1)
This deﬁnition yields a well deﬁned value for z! for any complex number
that is not a negative integer, and it coincides with the usual deﬁnition
of a factorial if z happens to be a non-negative integer.
We obtain the ground-state radial wavefunction by setting n = 1 in
equation (8.35):
u0
1(r) = 2
 Z
a0
3/2
e−Zr/a0.
(8.36)
The complete wavefunction is obtained by multiplying this by Y0
0 = (4π)−1/2.
Figure 8.4 shows the probability of ﬁnding the electron at a radius greater
than r. This reaches 13/e4 ≃0.24 at r = 2a0/Z, where the potential energy
is equal to the total energy. In classical physics the probability of ﬁnding the
electron at these radii is zero.
It is interesting to calculate the expectation value of r for circular orbits.
We have
⟨n, n −1, m|r|n, n −1, m⟩=
1
(2n)!
 2Z
na0
3Z ∞
0
dr r3
2Zr
na0
2(n−1)
e−2Zr/na0
= na0
2Z
1
(2n)!
Z ∞
0
dρ ρ2n+1e−ρ = n(n + 1
2)a0
Z .
(8.37)
In the classical limit of large n, ⟨r⟩≃n2a0/Z, so E ∝1/n2 ∝1/ ⟨r⟩as
classical physics predicts. (One can easily show that classical physics yields


8.1 Gross structure
189
Figure 8.5 Probability densities for
three orbits in hydrogen. All orbits have
n = 3 and m = l. Clockwise from top
left l increases from 0 to 2. The grey
scale shows the log to base 10 of the
probability density.
the correct proportionality constant.) A very similar calculation shows that

r2
= n2(n + 1)(n + 1
2)a2
0/Z2 = n + 1
n + 1
2
⟨r⟩2 ,
(8.38)
so the rms uncertainty in r is
q
⟨r2⟩−⟨r⟩2 = ⟨r⟩/√2n + 1. Consequently,
as n increases, the uncertainty in r increases as n3/2, but the fractional
uncertainty in r decreases as n−1/2.
Our conclusion that the radius of an atom scales as n2 implies that an
atom with n ∼100 occupies 1012 times as much volume as an atom in the
ground state. Consequently, only at high-vacuum densities can such highly
excited atoms be considered isolated systems. Radio telescopes detect line
radiation emitted by hydrogen atoms in the interstellar medium that are
reducing their value of n by δn from n ≃100. The frequency of such a
transition is
νn = En+δn −En
h
= R
h
 1
n2 −
1
(n + δn)2

≃6.58
100
n
3
δn GHz. (8.39)
Our analysis of the three-dimensional harmonic oscillator suggests that
applications of A†
l′ to un−1
n
should generate the wavefunctions ul
n for l < n−1.
We show that this is indeed the case by daggering both sides of equation
(8.22) to obtain
HlA†
l = A†
l Hl+1.
(8.40)
Consequently, applying A†
l to both sides of E|E, l + 1⟩= Hl+1|E, l + 1⟩we
have
E(A†
l |E, l + 1⟩= A†
l Hl+1|E, l + 1⟩= Hl(A†
l |E, l + 1⟩)
which establishes that A†
l |E, l + 1⟩is an eigenket of Hl as we hoped. Using
a result proved in Problem getAAdaggerprob, we have, in fact, that
|n, l⟩=
√2
Z

1
(l + 1) −1
n2
−1/2
A†
l |n, l + 1⟩.
(8.41)


190
Chapter 8: Hydrogen
Table 8.1
The ﬁrst six radial eigenfunctions ul
n(r) for hydrogen with
aZ ≡a0/Z. The full wavefunction is ul
n(r)Ym
l (θ, φ).
n
l
1
2
3
0
2e−r/aZ
a3/2
Z
2e−r/2aZ
(2aZ)3/2

1 −
r
2aZ

2e−r/3aZ
(3aZ)3/2

1 −2r
3aZ
+ 2r2
27a2
Z

1
e−r/2aZ
√3(2aZ)3/2
r
aZ
25/2e−r/3aZ
9(3aZ)3/2
r
aZ

1 −
r
6aZ

2
23/2e−r/3aZ
√27√5(3aZ)3/2
 r
aZ
2
From equations (8.15a) and (7.66) we can write
A†
l = −a0
√2
 ∂
∂r + l + 2
r
−
Z
(l + 1)a0

.
(8.42)
Setting l = n −2 we can apply this operator to un−1
n
to obtain
un−2
n
(r) = constant ×

1 −
Zr
n(n −1)a0

rn−2e−Zr/na0.
(8.43)
This wavefunction has a node at r = n(n−1)a0/Z. When we apply A†
n−3 to
this wavefunction to generate un−3
n
, the lowest power of r in the factor that
multiplies the exponential will be rn−3, so the exponential will be multiplied
by a quadratic in r and the wavefunction will have two nodes. In our study of
the three-dimensional harmonic oscillator we encountered the same pattern:
the number of nodes in the radial wavefunction increased by one every time
A† decrements the angular momentum and increases the energy of radial
motion. The radial eigenfunctions for states with n ≤3 are listed in Table 8.1
and plotted in Figure 8.5.
Notice that because un−1
n
(r) is a real function and A†
l is a real operator,
all the radial eigenfunctions are real. Because the probability current J is
proportional to the gradient of the phase of the wavefunction (eq. 2.87), the
reality of ul
n(r) implies that the probability current inside the atom has no
radial component. This makes perfectly good sense physically: the electron
moves both inwards and outwards and (unlike in the classical case) at any
given point the electron is as likely to be moving out as in.
8.1.3 Shielding
The electrostatic potential in which a bound electron moves is never ex-
actly proportional to 1/r as we have hitherto assumed.
In hydrogen or
a single-electron ion the deviations from 1/r proportionality are small but
measurable. In many-electron systems the deviations are large. In all cases
the deviations arise because the charge distribution that binds the electron
is not conﬁned to a point as we have assumed.
First, protons and neu-
trons have non-zero radii – after all there has to be room for three quarks
to move about in there at mildly relativistic speed! Second, even if the nu-
clear charge were conﬁned to a point, the ﬁeld it generates would not be an
inverse-square ﬁeld because in the intense electric ﬁeld that surrounds the
nucleus, a non-negligible charge density arises in the vacuum. This charge
density is predicted by quantum electrodynamics, the theory of the interac-
tion of the Dirac ﬁeld, whose excitations constitute electrons and positrons,
and the electromagnetic ﬁeld, whose excitations are photons. In a vacuum
the zero-point motions (§3.1) of these ﬁelds cause electron-positron pairs to
be constantly created, only to annihilate an extremely short time later. In


8.1 Gross structure
191
the strong ﬁeld near the nucleus, the positrons tend to spend their brief
lives further from the nucleus, which repels them, than do the electrons. In
consequence the charge inside a sphere drawn around the nucleus is slightly
smaller than the charge on the nucleus, the charge deﬁcit being small for
both very small and very large spheres. That is, quantum electrodynamics
predicts that the vacuum is a polarisable dielectric medium, just like an or-
dinary insulator, in which the electrons and ions move in opposite directions
when a ﬁeld is applied, giving rise to a net charge density within the medium.
When an atom has more than one electron, the deviation of the elec-
trostatic potential from 1/r proportionality is much larger than in hydrogen
since the charge on any electron other than the one whose dynamics we are
studying is distributed by quantum uncertainty through the space around
the nucleus, so the charge inside a sphere around the nucleus is comparable
to the charge on the nucleus when the sphere is very small, but falls to e
when the sphere is large.
Phenomena of this type, in which there is a tendency for a charged
body to gather oppositely charged bodies around it, are often referred to as
‘shielding’. A complete treatment of the action of shielding in even single-
electron systems involves quantum ﬁeld theory and is extremely complex.
In this section we modify the results we have obtained so far to explore an
idealised model of shielding, which makes it clear how shielding modiﬁes the
energy spectrum, and thus the dynamics of atomic species.
The key idea is to replace the atomic number Z in the Hamiltonian with
a decreasing function of radius. We adopt
Z(r) = Z0

1 + a
r

,
(8.44)
where Z0 and a are adjustable parameters. For r ≫a, the nuclear charge
tends to a maximally shielded value Z0e. For r ≃a, the charge is larger
by ∼Z0e.
At very small r, the charge diverges, but we anticipate that
this unphysical divergence will not have important consequences because the
electron is very unlikely to be found at r ≪a0/Z. With this choice for Z(r),
the radial Hamiltonian (8.12) becomes
H′
l = p2
r
2µ + {l(l + 1) −β}¯h2
2µr2
−Z0e2
4πǫ0r,
(8.45a)
where
β ≡Z0aµe2
2πǫ0¯h2 .
(8.45b)
Because we chose to take the radial dependence of Z to be proportional to
1/r, we have in the end simply reduced the repulsive centrifugal potential
term in the radial Hamiltonian. Let l′(l) be the positive root of the quadratic
equation
l′(l′ + 1) = l(l + 1) −β.
(8.46)
In general l′ will not be an integer. With this deﬁnition, H′
l is identical with
the Hamiltonian (8.12) of the unshielded case with l′ substituted for l and
Z0 replacing Z, that is
H′
l = Hl′(l).
(8.47)
Consequently, the operator Al′ that is deﬁned by equation (8.15a) with the
same substitutions satisﬁes (cf. eq. 8.17)
A†
l′Al′ = a2
0µ
¯h2 Hl′ +
Z2
0
2(l′ + 1).
(8.48)
Moreover by analogy with equation (8.19) we have
[Al′, A†
l′] = a2
0µ
¯h2 (Hl′+1 −Hl′).
(8.49)


192
Chapter 8: Hydrogen
It follows that Al′ is a ladder operator
EAl′|E, l′⟩= (Hl′Al′ + [Al′, Hl′])|E, l′⟩= Hl′+1Al′|E, l′⟩,
(8.50)
so Al′|E, l′⟩= α|E, l′ + 1⟩is an (unnormalised) eigenket of Hl′+1 just as in
the unshielded case. Applying Al′+1 to |E, l′ + 1⟩we argue that eventually
some maximum value L′ of l′ will be reached, at which point AL′|E, L′⟩= 0.
From the mod square of this equation we conclude that
E = −
Z2
0e2
8πǫ0a0(L′ + 1)2 ,
where
L′ = l′(l) + k,
(8.51)
where k is the number of times we have to apply A to achieve annihilation.
Since for a̸ = 0, l′(l) is not an integer, E is given by the formula (8.25)
for the unshielded case with n replaced by a number that is not an integer.
Moreover, the energy now depends on l as well as on n, where n is deﬁned
to be 1 + l plus the number of nodes in the radial wavefunction at r < ∞.
To see this, consider the eﬀect of increasing our initial value of l by one, and
correspondingly decreasing by one the number of times we have to apply Al′
to achieve annihilation. In an unshielded atom l′ = l, so E is unchanged
when l is increased and k decreased by unity; we have moved between states
with the same value of n. In the shielded case, increasing l by unity does
not increment l′(l) by unity, so in equation (8.51) the changes in l′ and k do
not conspire to hold constant L′. In fact one can show from equation (8.46)
that when l increases by one, l′ increases by more than one (Problem 8.13),
so among states with a given principal quantum number, those with the
largest l values have the smallest binding energies. This makes perfect sense
physically because it is the eccentric orbits that take the electron close to
the nucleus, where the nuclear charge appears greatest.
In 1947 Lamb & Retherford showed3 that in hydrogen the state |2, 0, 0⟩
lies 4.4 × 10−6 eV below the states |2, 1, m⟩, contrary to naive predictions
from the Dirac equation. This Lamb shift is due to shielding of the proton
by electron-positron pairs in the surrounding vacuum.
8.1.4 Expectation values for r−k
It will prove expedient to have formulae for the expectation value of r−k with
hydrogenic wavefunctions and the ﬁrst three values of k.
The value of

r−1
can be obtained from the virial theorem (2.93) since
in hydrogen the potential energy is ∝r−1. With α = −1, equation (2.93)
implies that
2⟨E| p2
2m|E⟩= −⟨E|V |E⟩.
(8.52)
On the other hand the expectation of the Hamiltonian yields
⟨E| p2
2m|E⟩+ ⟨E|V |E⟩= E,
(8.53)
so we have
⟨E|V |E⟩= −Ze2
4πǫ0
⟨E|r−1|E⟩= 2E = −
Z2e2
4πǫ0a0n2 .
(8.54)
It follows that

r−1
= Z/(n2a0).
To obtain

r−2
we anticipate a result that we shall prove in §9.1. This
relates to what happens when we add a term βH1 to a system’s Hamiltonian,
where β is a number and H1 is an operator. The nth eigenenergy of the
3 W.E. Lamb & R.C. Retherford, Phys. Rev. 72, 241


8.2 Fine structure and beyond
193
complete Hamiltonian then becomes a function of β, and in §9.1 we show
that
dE
dβ

β=0
= ⟨E|H1|E⟩.
(8.55)
We apply this result to a hydrogen-like system with the additional Hamilto-
nian
H1 = −¯h2
2µr2 .
(8.56)
In the last subsection we showed that the exact eigenvalues of this system
are given by equation (8.51). Diﬀerentiating the eigenvalues with respect to
β and using equation (8.55) we ﬁnd
¯h2
2µ⟨E|r−2|E⟩=
d
dβ

β=0
Z2e2
8πǫ0a0(l′ + k)2 = −
Z2e2
4πǫ0a0(l + k)3
dl′
dβ
(8.57)
From equation (8.46) we have dl′/dβ = −1/(2l + 1), so
⟨E|r−2|E⟩=
Z2e2µ
2πǫ0a0¯h2n3(2l + 1) =
Z2
a2
0n3(l + 1
2),
(8.58)
where the last equality uses the deﬁnition (8.15b) of the Bohr radius.
We determine

r−3
by considering the expectation value of the com-
mutator [H, pr]. As we saw in §2.2.1, in a stationary state the commutator
with H of any observable vanishes. Hence with equation (8.12) we can write
0 = ⟨E|[H, pr]|E⟩= l(l + 1)¯h2
2µ
⟨E|[r−2, pr]|E⟩−Ze2
4πǫ0
⟨E|[r−1, pr]|E⟩(8.59)
Using the canonical commutation relation [r, pr] = i¯h [equation (7.67)] to
evaluate the commutators in this expression, and the value of

r−2
that we
have just established, we ﬁnd
⟨E|r−3|E⟩=
Z3
a3
0n3l(l + 1)(l + 1
2).
(8.60)
The three values of

r−k
that we have calculated conform to a pattern.
First the basic atomic scale a0/Z is raised to the −kth power. Then there is
a product of 2k quantum numbers on the bottom, reﬂecting the tendency for
the atom’s size to grow as n2. Finally, as k increases, the number of factors
of l increases from zero to three, reﬂecting the growing sensitivity of

r−3
to orbital eccentricity.
8.2 Fine structure and beyond
The model of hydrogen-like ions that we developed in the last section is
satisfying and useful, but it is far from complete. We now consider some of
the physics that is neglected by this model.
In §2.3.5 we saw that when a particle that moves in an inverse-square
force ﬁeld is in a stationary state, the expectation value of its kinetic energy,
classically
1
2mv2, is equal in magnitude but opposite in sign to its total
energy. Equation (8.25) is an expression for the ground-state energy of an
electron in a hydrogen-like ion. When we equate the absolute value of this
expression to 1
2mev2, we ﬁnd that the ratio of v to the speed of light c is
v
c = αZ,
(8.61)


194
Chapter 8: Hydrogen
where the dimensionless ﬁne structure constant is deﬁned to be
α ≡
e2
4πǫ0¯hc ≃
1
137.
(8.62)
Since relativistic corrections tend to be O(v2/c2), it follows that in hydrogen
relativistic corrections to the results we have derived may be expected to
be several parts in 105, but these corrections, being proportional to Z2, will
exceed 10% by the middle of the periodic table.
For future reference we note that with the reduced mass µ approximated
by me, equation (8.15b) for the Bohr radius can be written
a0 =
¯h
αmec = λCompton
2πα
,
(8.63)
where we have identiﬁed the electron’s Compton wavelength h/mec (the
wavelength of a photon that has energy mec2). When we use this expression
to eliminate a0 from equation (8.25), we ﬁnd that the energy levels of a
hydrogen-like ion are
E = −Z2α2
2n2 mec2,
so
R = 1
2α2mec2.
(8.64)
8.2.1 Spin-orbit coupling
Magnetism is a relativistic correction to electrostatics in the sense that a
particle that is moving with velocity v in an electric ﬁeld E experiences a
magnetic ﬁeld
B = 1
c2 v × E.
(8.65)
If the particle has a magnetic dipole moment µ, it experiences a torque
G = µ × B that will cause its spin S to precess. In the particle’s rest frame
the classical equation of motion of S is
dS
dt = 1
¯hµ × B,
(8.66)
where ¯h appears only because S is the dimensionless spin obtained by divid-
ing the angular momentum by ¯h. We assume that the magnetic moment µ is
proportional to the dimensionless spin vector S and write the proportionality
µ = gQ¯h
2m0
S,
(8.67)
where g is the dimensionless gyromagnetic ratio, and Q and m0 are the
particle’s charge and rest mass. In the case of an electron g = 2.002, a value
which is correctly predicted by relativistic quantum electrodynamics, and
the dimensional factor is deﬁned to be the Bohr magneton
µB ≡e¯h
2me
= 9.27 × 10−24 J T−1.
(8.68)
With this notation, our rest-frame equation of motion (8.66) becomes
dS
dt = gQ
2m0
S × B.
(8.69)
The non-zero value of the right side of this classical equation of motion
for S implies that there is a spin-dependent term in the particle’s Hamiltonian
since the operator S commutes with all spatial operators (§7.4) and the
right side of the classical equation of motion (8.69) is proportional to the


8.2 Fine structure and beyond
195
expectation of [S, H] (cf. eq. 2.57). We want to determine what this term in
H is.
Energy is not a relativistic invariant – it is physically obvious that ob-
servers who move relative to one another assign diﬀerent energies to a given
system. Consequently, when they do quantum mechanics they use diﬀerent
Hamiltonians. We need the Hamiltonian that governs the dynamics of the
reduced particle in the rest frame of the atom’s centre of mass. So we have
to transform the equation of motion (8.69) to this frame. This is a tricky
business because the reduced particle is accelerating, so the required Lorentz
transformation is time-dependent. Given the delicacy of the required trans-
formation, it is advisable to work throughout with explicitly Lorentz ‘covari-
ant’ quantities, which are explained in Appendix G. In Appendix H these
are used to show that in a frame of reference in which the electron is moving,
equation (8.69) becomes
dS
dt =
Q
2m0c2

−¯h
m0r
dΦ
dr S × L + 2c2S × B

.
(8.70)
It is straightforward to demonstrate (Problem 8.14) from equation (2.34) that
this classical equation of motion of the spin S of an electron (which has charge
Q = −e) arises if we introduce into the quantum-mechanical Hamiltonian
(8.1) two spin-dependent terms, namely the spin-orbit Hamiltonian
HSO ≡−dΦ
dr
e¯h2
2rm2ec2 S · L,
(8.71)
and the Zeeman spin Hamiltonian
HZS ≡e¯h
me
S · B.
(8.72)
The Zeeman spin Hamiltonian is just µ · B with equation (8.67) used to
replace the magnetic moment operator by the spin operator. Interestingly,
the spin-orbit Hamiltonian is a factor two smaller than µ·B with µ replaced
in the same way and equation (8.65) used to relate B to the electric ﬁeld
in which the electron is moving. In the 1920s the experimental data clearly
required this factor of two diﬀerence in the spin Hamiltonians, but its origin
puzzled the pioneers of the subject until, in 1927, L.T. Thomas4 showed that
it is a consequence of the fact that the electron’s rest frame is accelerating
(Appendix H). If no torque is applied to a gyro, it does not precess in its
instantaneous rest frame. But if the direction of the gyro’s motion is chang-
ing relative to some inertial frame, the sequence of Lorentz transformations
that are required to transform the spin vector into the inertial frame causes
the spin to precess in the inertial frame.
This apparent precession of an
accelerated gyro is called Thomas precession.
In a single-electron system such as hydrogen, Φ = Ze/(4πǫ0r), so
HSO = Zα¯h3
2m2ecr3 S · L,
(8.73)
where the ﬁne-structure constant (8.62) has been used to absorb the 4πǫ0.
Since the coeﬃcient in front of the operator S · L is positive, spin-orbit
coupling lowers the energy when the spin and orbital angular momenta are
antiparallel.
The operator S · L in equation (8.73) is most conveniently written
S · L = 1
2((L + S)2 −L2 −S2) = 1
2(J2 −L2 −S2),
(8.74)
4 Phil. Mag. 3, 1 (1927)


196
Chapter 8: Hydrogen
Figure 8.6 The ﬁne structure of
a hydrogen-like ion with Z = 200
that is predicted by equation (8.76a).
The dotted line denotes a break in
the energy scale so that the ground
state can be included.
so HSO is diagonal in a basis made up of mutual eigenkets of J2, L2 and S2.
In §7.5 we constructed such mutual eigenkets from the eigenkets of S2, Sz,
L2, and Lz. S · L annihilates states with quantum number l = 0 because
then j = s. Hence, there is no spin-orbit coupling in the ground state of
hydrogen. In any excited state, l > 0 is permitted, and from §7.5.2 we know
that the possible values of j are l ± 1
2. The associated eigenvalues of the
operator on the right of equation (8.74) are readily found to be
1
2{j(j + 1) −l(l + 1) −3
4} =
 1
2l
for j = l + 1
2,
−1
2(l + 1)
for j = l −1
2.
(8.75)
Although S · L commutes with the gross-structure Hamiltonian HGS
(eq. 8.1), the other operator in HSO, namely r−3, does not. So the eigenkets
of HGS + HSO will diﬀer (subtly) from the eigenkets we have found.
In
§9.1 we shall show that in these circumstances the change in the energy of a
stationary state can be estimated by replacing the operator by its expectation
value. Equation (8.60) gives this value, and, inserting this with our results
for the spin operators, yields energy shifts
∆E ≡⟨n, l, m|HSO|n, l, m⟩≃Kn
. ( (l + 1)(l + 1
2)
for j = l + 1
2
−l(l + 1
2)
for j = l −1
2
(l > 0),
(8.76a)
where
Kn ≡
Z4α¯h3
4a3
0m2ecn3 = Z4α4
4n3 mec2,
(8.76b)
and the second equality uses equation (8.63) for a0. The diﬀerence between
the energies of states with j = l ± 1
2 is
El+1/2 −El−1/2 =
2Kn
l(l + 1).
(8.76c)
For n = 1 the ﬁne-structure energy scale Kn is smaller than the gross-
structure energy (8.64) by a factor Z2/2α2 that rises from parts in 105 for
hydrogen to more than 10% by the middle of the periodic table.5 In hydrogen
ﬁne-structure is largest in the n = 2, l = 1 level, which is split into j = 3
2 and
j = 1
2 sublevels. According to equations (8.76c), these sublevels are separated
by K2 = 4.53 × 10−5 eV, while the measured shift is 4.54 × 10−5 eV.
Figure 8.6 shows the prediction of equation (8.76a) for the energy levels
of a hydrogen-like ion with Z = 200. With this unrealistically large value
5 Naturally, the ﬁne-structure constant owes its name to its appearance in this ratio
of the ﬁne-structure and gross energies.


8.2 Fine structure and beyond
197
of Z the ﬁne structure for n = 2 has comparable magnitude to the gross-
structure diﬀerence between the n = 2 and n = 3 levels.
The levels in
this ﬁgure are labelled in an obscure notation that is traditional in atomic
physics and more fully explaine in Box 10.2. The value of n appears ﬁrst,
followed by one of the letters S, P, D, F to denote l = 0, 1, 2, 3, respectively.6
The value of j appears as a subscript to the letter, and the value of 2s +
1 (here always 2) appears before the letter as a superscript. So the level
22P3/2 has n = 2, s = 1/2, l = 1, and j =
3
2. From Figure 8.6 we see
that states in which j is less than l (because the electron’s spin and orbital
angular momenta are antiparallel) are predicted to have lower energies than
the corresponding states in which the two angular momenta are aligned. The
spin–orbit interaction vanishes by symmetry for s = 0 but otherwise at ﬁxed
n the magnitude of the eﬀect decreases with increasing angular momentum
because the electron’s top speed on a nearly circular orbit is smaller than on
an eccentric orbit, so relativistic eﬀects are largest on eccentric orbits.
Equation (8.76a) suggests that states that diﬀer in l but not j should
have diﬀerent energies, whereas they do in fact have extremely similar en-
ergies. For example, the 22S1/2 state lies 4.383 × 10−6 eV above the 22P1/2
state, while equation (8.76a) implies that this energy diﬀerence should be
3
2K2 = 6.79×10−5 eV. This discrepancy arises because the spin-orbit Hamil-
tonian does not provide a complete description to order α4 of relativistic
corrections to the electrostatic Hamiltonian. Actually, additional corrections
shift the energy of the 22S1/2 states into close alignment with the energy of
the 22P1/2 states.7
However, in atoms with more than one electron, the
electrostatic repulsion between the electrons shifts the energy of the 22S1/2
states downwards by much larger amounts. These electrostatic corrections
are hard to calculate accurately, so the much smaller relativistic corrections
are not interesting, experimentally, and the quantities of interest are diﬀer-
ence in energy between states with the same values of l but diﬀerent j. These
diﬀerence are correctly given by equation (8.76a).
Relativistic quantum electrodynamics is in perfect agreement with mea-
surements of hydrogen. It uses the Dirac equation rather than classically-
inspired corrections to the electrostatic Hamiltonian. We have devoted sig-
niﬁcant space to deriving the spin-orbit Hamiltonian not because it plays a
role in hydrogen, but because it becomes important as one proceeds down
the periodic table. The other relativistic corrections also become large by the
middle of the periodic table, but outside hydrogen their eﬀects are so masked
by electron-electron interactions that they are of little practical importance
and we shall not discuss them in this book.
8.2.2 Hyperﬁne structure
A proton is a charged spin-half particle, so like an electron it has a magnetic
moment. By analogy with the deﬁnition of the Bohr magneton (eq. 8.68),
we deﬁne the nuclear magneton to be
µp ≡
e¯h
2mp
= 5.05 × 10−27 J T−1.
(8.78)
6 These letters are a shorthand for a description of spectral lines that later were found
to involve the various l values: sharp, principal, diﬀuse, faint.
7 In the lowest order of relativistic quantum electrodynamics, the energy of a hydrogen
atom depends on only n and j: the Dirac equation predicts
E = −R
n2
(
1 −α2Z2
n2
 
3
4 −
n
j + 1
2
!)
.
(8.77)
Thus the 22S1/2 states are predicted to have the same energy as the 22P1/2 states. The
measured Lamb shift between these states arises in the next order as a consequence of
polarisation of the vacuum, as described in §8.1.3.


198
Chapter 8: Hydrogen
In terms of µp, the magnetic-moment operator of the proton is
µ = gpµpSp,
(8.79)
where gp = 5.58 and Sp is proton’s spin operator, so the proton’s magnetic
moment is smaller than that of an electron by a factor 2.79me/mp ≃1.5 ×
10−3.
The electron in a hydrogen atom can create a magnetic ﬁeld at the
location of the proton in two ways: as a moving charge, it generates a cur-
rent, and it has its intrinsic magnetic moment, so its probability distribution
|ψ(x)|2 is a distribution of magnetic dipoles that will generate a magnetic
ﬁeld just as iron does in a bar magnet.
The ground level of hydrogen is a particularly simple case because in
this state the electron has no orbital angular momentum, so it generates a
magnetic ﬁeld exclusively through its dipole moment. The magnetic vector
potential distance r from a magnetic dipole µe is
A = µ0
4π
µe × r
r3
= µ0
4π∇×
µe
r

.
(8.80)
The magnetic ﬁeld is B = ∇×A, so the hyperﬁne-structure Hamiltonian
for the ground state is
HHFS = µp · B = µ0
4π µp · ∇×
n
∇×
µe
r
o
.
(8.81)
Until HHFS is included in the atom’s Hamiltonian, the atom’s lowest
energy level is degenerate because the spins of the electron and the proton
can be combined in a number of diﬀerent ways. To proceed further we need
to evaluate the matrix elements obtained by squeezing HHFS between states
that form a basis for the ground-level states. The natural basis to use is
made up of the states |j = 0⟩and |j = 1, m⟩for m = −1, 0, 1 that can be
constructed by adding two spin-half systems (§7.5.1). In Appendix I we show
that the resulting matrix elements are
⟨ψ, s|HHFS|ψ, s′⟩= 2µ0
3 |ψ(0)|2⟨s|µp · µe|s′⟩
= −2µ0
3 |ψ(0)|2gpµp2µB⟨s|Sp · Se|s′⟩,
(8.82)
where we have replaced the magnetic moment operators by the appropri-
ate multiples of the spin operators. From our discussion of the spin-orbit
Hamiltonian (8.73), which is also proportional to the dot product of two
angular-momentum operators, we know that the eigenstates of the total an-
gular momentum operators are simultaneously eigenstates of Sp · Se with
eigenvalues
1
2{j(j + 1) −3
4 −3
4}, so in this basis the oﬀ-diagonal matrix
elements vanish and the diagonal ones are
⟨ψ, j, m|HHFS|ψ, j, m⟩= −2µ0
3 |ψ(0)|2gpµpµB{j(j + 1) −3
2}.
(8.83)
In §9.1 we shall show that the diagonal matrix elements provide a good
estimates of the amount by which HHFS shifts the energies of the stationary
states of the gross-structure Hamiltonian.
The total angular-momentum quantum number of the atom can be j = 0
or j = 1 and the two possible values of the curly bracket above diﬀer by two.
Equation (8.36) gives |ψ(0)|2 = 1/(πa3
0), so the energies of these levels diﬀer
by
∆E = 4µ0
3πa3
0
5.58µpµB = 5.88 × 10−6 eV.
(8.84)
The lower level, having j = 0, is non-degenerate, while the excited state is
three-fold degenerate. Transitions between these levels give rise to radiation


Problems
199
of frequency 1.420 405 7518 GHz. To obtain perfect agreement between this
most accurately measured frequency and equation (8.84), it is necessary to
change the gyromagnetic ratio of the electron from the value of 2 that we
have adopted to the value 2.002319 . . . that is predicted by quantum electro-
dynamics. The agreement between theory and experiment is then impressive.
The hyperﬁne line of hydrogen provides the most powerful way of tracing
diﬀuse gas in interstellar and intergalactic space. Radiation at this frequency
can propagate with little absorption right through clouds of dust and gas
that absorb optical radiation. Consequently it was in radiation at 1.4 GHz
that the large-scale structure of our own galaxy was ﬁrst revealed in the
1950s. The line is intrinsically very narrow with the consequence that the
temperature and radial velocity of the hydrogen that emits the radiation
can be accurately measured from the Doppler shift and broadening in the
observed spectral line.
The existence of 1.4 GHz line radiation from our
galaxy was predicted theoretically by H.C. van de Hulst as part of his doctoral
work in Nazi-occupied Utrecht. In 1951 groups in the USA and Australia
and the Netherlands, detected the line almost simultaneously. The Dutch
group used a German radar antenna left over from the war.
Problems
8.1
Some things about hydrogen’s gross structure that it’s important to
know (ignore spin throughout):
a) What quantum numbers characterise stationary states of hydrogen?
b) What combinations of values of these numbers are permitted?
c) Give the formula for the energy of a stationary state in terms of the
Rydberg R. What is the value of R in eV?
d) How many stationary states are there in the ﬁrst excited level and in
the second excited level?
e) What is the wavefunction of the ground state?
f) Write down an expression for the mass of the reduced particle.
g) The wavefunction ⟨x|n⟩of any state with principal quantum number n
contains an exponential in r = |x|. Write down the scale length of this
exponential in terms of the Bohr radius a0.
h) We can apply hydrogenic formulae to any two charged particles that are
electrostatically bound. How does the ground-state energy then scale
with (i) the mass of the reduced particle, and (ii) the charge Ze on the
nucleus? (iii) How does the radial scale of the system scale with Z?
8.2
Show, by induction or otherwise, that there are n2 stationary states of
hydrogen with energy E = −R/n2.
8.3
In the Bohr atom, electrons move on classical circular orbits that have
angular momenta l¯h, where l = 1, 2, . . .. Show that the radius of the ﬁrst
Bohr orbit is a0 and that the model predicts the correct energy spectrum.
In fact the ground state of hydrogen has zero angular momentum. Why did
Bohr get correct answers from an incorrect hypothesis?
8.4
Show that the speed of a classical electron in the lowest Bohr orbit
(Problem 8.3) is v = αc, where α = e2/4πǫ0¯hc is the ﬁne-structure constant.
What is the corresponding speed for a hydrogen-like Fe ion (atomic number
Z = 26)? Given these results, what fractional errors must we expect in the
energies of states that we derive from non-relativistic quantum mechanics.
8.5
Show that Bohr’s hypothesis (that a particle’s angular momentum must
be an integer multiple of ¯h), when applied to the three-dimensional harmonic
oscillator, predicts energy levels E = l¯hω with l = 1, 2, . . ..
Is there an
experiment that would falsify this prediction?
8.6
Show that the electric ﬁeld experienced by an electron in the ground
state of hydrogen is of order 5×1011 V m−1. Why is it impossible to generate
comparable macroscopic ﬁelds using charged electrodes. Lasers are available
that can generate beam ﬂuxes as big as 1022 W m−2. Show that the electric
ﬁeld in such a beam is of comparable magnitude.


200
Problems
8.7
Positronium consists of an electron and a positron (both spin-half and
of equal mass) in orbit around one another. What are its energy levels? By
what factor is a positronium atom bigger than a hydrogen atom?
8.8
The emission spectrum of the He+ ion contains the Pickering series of
spectral lines that is analogous to the Lyman, Balmer and Paschen series in
the spectrum of hydrogen.
Balmer i = 1, 2, . . .
0.456806
0.616682
0.690685
0.730884
Pickering i = 2, 4, . . .
0.456987
0.616933
0.690967
0.731183
The table gives the frequencies (in 1015 Hz) of the ﬁrst four lines of the Balmer
series and the ﬁrst four even-numbered lines of the Pickering series. The
frequencies of these lines in the Pickering series are almost coincident with
the frequencies of lines of the Balmer series. Explain this ﬁnding. Provide a
quantitative explanation of the small oﬀset between these nearly coincident
lines in terms of the reduced mass of the electron in the two systems. (In 1896
E.C. Pickering identiﬁed the odd-numbered lines in his series in the spectrum
of the star ζ Puppis. Helium had yet to be discovered and he believed that
the lines were being produced by hydrogen. Naturally he confused the even-
numbered lines of his series with ordinary Balmer lines.)
8.9
Tritium, 3H, is highly radioactive and decays with a half-life of 12.3
years to 3He by the emission of an electron from its nucleus. The electron
departs with 16 keV of kinetic energy. Explain why its departure can be
treated as sudden in the sense that the electron of the original tritium atom
barely moves while the ejected electron leaves.
Calculate the probability that the newly-formed 3He atom is in an ex-
cited state. Hint: evaluate ⟨1, 0, 0; Z = 2|1, 0, 0; Z = 1⟩.
8.10∗
A spherical potential well is deﬁned by
V (r) =

0
for r < a
V0
otherwise,
(8.85)
where V0 > 0. Consider a stationary state with angular-momentum quantum
number l.
By writing the wavefunction ψ(x) = R(r)Ym
l (θ, φ) and using
p2 = p2
r + ¯h2L2/r2, show that the state’s radial wavefunction R(r) must
satisfy
−¯h2
2m
 d
dr + 1
r
2
R + l(l + 1)¯h2
2mr2
R + V (r)R = ER.
(8.86)
Show that in terms of S(r) ≡rR(r), this can be reduced to
d2S
dr2 −l(l + 1) S
r2 + 2m
¯h2 (E −V )S = 0.
(8.87)
Assume that V0 > E > 0. For the case l = 0 write down solutions to this
equation valid at (a) r < a and (b) r > a. Ensure that R does not diverge
at the origin. What conditions must S satisfy at r = a? Show that these
conditions can be simultaneously satisﬁed if and only if a solution can be
found to k cot ka = −K, where ¯h2k2 = 2mE and ¯h2K2 = 2m(V0 −E).
Show graphically that the equation can only be solved when √2mV0 a/¯h >
π/2.
Compare this result with that obtained for the corresponding one-
dimensional potential well.
The deuteron is a bound state of a proton and a neutron with zero
angular momentum. Assume that the strong force that binds them produces
a sharp potential step of height V0 at interparticle distance a = 2 × 10−15 m.
Determine in MeV the minimum value of V0 for the deuteron to exist. Hint:
remember to consider the dynamics of the reduced particle.


Problems
201
8.11
Let the wavefunction of the stationary states of the gross-structure
Hamiltonian of hydrogen be ⟨x|n, l, m⟩= ul
n(r)Ym
l (θ, φ). Show that
Z ∞
0
dr r2ul
n(r)ul
n′(r) = δnn′.
(8.88)
By considering an appropriate Sturm-Liouville equation, or otherwise, show
further that
Z ∞
0
dr ul
n(r)ul′
n(r) = Clδll′.
(8.89)
8.12
Show that for hydrogen the matrix element ⟨2, 0, 0|z|2, 1, 0⟩= −3a0.
On account of the non-zero value of this matrix element, when an electric
ﬁeld is applied to a hydrogen atom in its ﬁrst excited state, the atom’s energy
is linear in the ﬁeld strength (§9.1.2).
8.13∗
From equation (8.46) show that l′ + 1
2 =
q
(l + 1
2)2 −β and that the
increment ∆in l′ when l is increased by one satisﬁes ∆2+∆(2l′+1) = 2(l+1).
By considering the amount by which the solution of this equation changes
when l′ changes from l as a result of β increasing from zero to a small number,
show that
∆= 1 +
2β
4l2 −1 + O(β2).
(8.90)
Explain the physical signiﬁcance of this result.
8.14
Show that Ehrenfest’s theorem yields equation (8.70) with B = 0
as the classical equation of motion of the vector S that is implied by the
spin–orbit Hamiltonian (8.71).
8.15∗
(a) A particle of mass m moves in a spherical potential V (r). Show
that according to classical mechanics
d
dt(p × Lc) = mr2 dV
dr
der
dt ,
(8.91)
where Lc = r × p is the classical angular-momentum vector and er is the
unit vector in the radial direction. Hence show that when V (r) = −K/r,
with K a constant, the Runge-Lenz vector Mc ≡p × Lc −mKer is a
constant of motion. Deduce that Mc lies in the orbital plane, and that for
an elliptical orbit it points from the centre of attraction to the pericentre of
the orbit, while it vanishes for a circular orbit.
(b) Show that in quantum mechanics (p × L)† −p × L = −2ip. Hence
explain why in quantum mechanics we take the Runge-Lenz vector operator
to be
M ≡1
2¯hN −mKer
where
N ≡p × L −L × p.
(8.92)
Explain why we can write down the commutation relation [Li, Mj] = i P
k ǫijkMk.
(c) Explain why [p2, N] = 0 and why [1/r, p × L] = [1/r, p] × L. Hence
show that
[1/r, N] = i
 1
r3 (r2p −x x · p) −
 pr2 −p · x x
 1
r3

.
(8.93)
(d) Show that
[p2, er] = i¯h

−

p1
r + 1
r p

+
X
j

pj
xj
r3 x + xxj
r3 pj

.
(8.94)
(e) Hence show that [H, M] = 0. What is the physical signiﬁcance of
this result?


202
Problems
(f) Show that (i) [Mi, L2] = i P
jk ǫijk(MkLj +LjMk), (ii) [Li, M 2] = 0,
where M 2 ≡M 2
x + M 2
y + M 2
z . What are the physical implications of these
results?
(g) Show that
[Ni, Nj] = −4i
X
u
ǫijup2Lu
(8.95)
and that
[Ni, (er)j] −[Nj, (er)i] = −4i¯h
r
X
t
ǫijtLt
(8.96)
and hence that
[Mi, Mj] = −2i¯h2mH
X
k
ǫijkLk.
(8.97)
What physical implication does this equation have?


9
Perturbation theory
It is rarely possible to solve exactly for the dynamics of a system of experi-
mental interest. In these circumstances we use some kind of approximation
to tweak the solution to some model system that is as close as possible to
the system of interest and yet is simple enough to have analytically solvable
dynamics. That is, we treat the diﬀerence between the experimental system
and the model system as a ‘perturbation’ of the model. Perturbation theory
in this sense was an important part of mathematical physics before quantum
mechanics appeared on the scene – in fact the development of Hamiltonian
mechanics was driven by people who were using perturbation theory to un-
derstand the dynamics of the solar system. Interestingly, while perturbation
theory in classical mechanics remains an eclectic branch of knowledge that is
understood only by a select few, perturbation theory in quantum mechanics
is a part of main-stream undergraduate syllabuses. There are two reasons
for this. First, analytically soluble models are even rarer in quantum than in
classical physics, so more systems have to be modelled approximately. Sec-
ond, in quantum mechanics perturbation theory is a good deal simpler and
works rather better than in classical mechanics.
9.1 Time-independent perturbations
Let H be the Hamiltonian of the experimental system and H0 the Hamil-
tonian of the model system for which we have already solved the eigenvalue
problem. We hope that ∆≡H −H0 is small and deﬁne
Hβ = H0 + β∆.
(9.1)
We can think of Hβ as the Hamiltonian of an apparatus that has a knob on
it labelled ‘β’; when the knob is turned to β = 0, the apparatus is the model
system, and as the knob is turned round to β = 1, the apparatus is gradually
deformed into the system of experimental interest.
We seek the eigenkets |E⟩and eigenvalues E of Hβ as functions of β.
Since the Hamiltonian of the apparatus is a continuous function of β, we
conjecture that the |E⟩and E are continuous functions of β too. In fact, we


204
Chapter 9: Perturbation theory
conjecture that they are analytic functions1 of β so they can be expanded as
power series
|E⟩= |a⟩+ β|b⟩+ β2|c⟩+ · · ·
;
E = Ea + βEb + β2Ec + · · · ,
(9.2)
where |a⟩, |b⟩, etc., are states to be determined and Ea, Eb, etc., are appropri-
ate numbers. When we plug our conjectured forms (9.2) into the eigenvalue
equation H|ψ⟩= E|ψ⟩, we have
(H0 +β∆)
 |a⟩+β|b⟩+β2|c⟩+) =
 Ea +βEb +β2Ec +
  |a⟩+β|b⟩+β2|c⟩+

.
(9.3)
Since we require the equality to hold for any value of β, we can equate the
coeﬃcient of every power of β on either side of the equation.
β0 :
β1 :
β2 :
H0|a⟩= Ea|a⟩
H0|b⟩+ ∆|a⟩= Ea|b⟩+ Eb|a⟩
H0|c⟩+ ∆|b⟩= Ea|c⟩+ Eb|b⟩+ Ec|a⟩.
(9.4)
The ﬁrst equation simply states that Ea and |a⟩are an eigenvalue and eigen-
ket of H0. Physically, |a⟩is the state that we will ﬁnd the system in if we
slowly turn the knob back to zero after making a measurement of the energy.
Henceforth we shall relabel Ea with E0 and relabel |a⟩with |E0⟩, the zero
reminding us of the association with β = 0 rather than implying that |E0⟩
is the ground state of the unperturbed system.
To determine Eb we multiply the second equation through by ⟨E0|:
⟨E0|H0|b⟩+ ⟨E0|∆|E0⟩= E0⟨E0|b⟩+ Eb.
(9.5)
Now from Table 2.1, ⟨E0|H0|b⟩= (⟨b|H0|E0⟩)∗= E0⟨E0|b⟩. Cancelling this
with the identical term on the right, we are left with
Eb = ⟨E0|∆|E0⟩.
(9.6)
Thus the ﬁrst-order change in the energy is just the expectation value of
the change in the Hamiltonian when the system is in its unperturbed state,
which makes good sense intuitively. This is the result that we anticipated in
§§8.2.1 and 8.2.2 to estimate the eﬀects on the allowed energies of hydrogen
of the spin-orbit and hyperﬁne Hamiltonians.
To extract the second-order change in E we multiply the third of equa-
tions (9.4) by ⟨E0|. Cancelling ⟨E0|H0|c⟩on E0⟨E0|c⟩by strict analogy with
what we just did, we obtain
Ec = ⟨E0|∆|b⟩−Eb⟨E0|b⟩.
(9.7)
To proceed further we have to determine |b⟩, the ﬁrst-order change in the
state vector. Since the eigenkets |En⟩of H0 form a complete set of states,
we can write |b⟩as the sum
|b⟩=
X
k
bk|Ek⟩.
(9.8)
In the second of equations (9.4) we replace |b⟩by this expansion and multiply
through by ⟨Em|̸ = ⟨E0| to ﬁnd
bm = ⟨Em|∆|E0⟩
E0 −Em
.
(9.9)
1 Much interesting physics is associated with phenomena in which a small change in
one variable can produce a large change in another (phase changes, narrow resonances,
caustics, . . . ). In classical physics perturbation theory is bedevilled by such phenomena.
In quantum mechanics this conjecture is more successful, but still untrustworthy as we
shall see in §9.1.2.


9.1 Time-independent perturbations
205
Box 9.1:
Ensuring that ⟨a|b⟩= 0
Since the perturbed eigenket should be properly normalised, we have
1 = ⟨E|E⟩= (⟨E0| + β⟨b| + · · ·) (|E0⟩+ β|b⟩+ · · ·)
= 1 + β (⟨E0|b⟩+ ⟨b|E0⟩) + O(β2).
Equating the coeﬃcient of β on each side of the equation we conclude
that ⟨E0|b⟩+ ⟨b|E0⟩= 0, from which it follows that ⟨E0|b⟩is pure imagi-
nary. The phase of |E⟩is arbitrary, and we are free to choose this phase
independently for each model Hamiltonian Hβ. In particular, instead of
using |E⟩we can use |E′⟩≡eiαβ|E⟩, where α is any real constant: |E′⟩
is our original eigenket but with its phase shifted by a linear function of
β. When we expand |E′⟩in powers of β we have
|E′⟩= |E0⟩+ β|b′⟩+ · · · ,
where |b′⟩is the derivative of |E′⟩with respect to β evaluated at β = 0.
This is
|b′⟩= d|E′⟩
dβ

β=0
= d
dβ
 eiαβ|E⟩
 
β=0
= iα|E0⟩+ |b⟩.
Consequently,
⟨E0|b′⟩= iα + ⟨E0|b⟩.
Since ⟨E0|b⟩is known to be pure imaginary, it is clear that we can choose
α such that ⟨E0|b′⟩= 0.
This analysis shows that the phases of the
perturbed eigenkets can be chosen such that the ﬁrst order perturbation
|b⟩is orthogonal to the unperturbed state |E0⟩and one generally assumes
that this choice has been made.
This expression determines the coeﬃcient of all kets in (9.8) that have en-
ergies that diﬀer from the unperturbed value E0. For the moment we as-
sume that E0 is a non-degenerate eigenvalue of H0, so there is only one
undetermined coeﬃcient, namely that of |E0⟩.
Fortunately we can argue
that this coeﬃcient can be taken to be zero from the requirement that
|E⟩= |E0⟩+ β|b⟩+ O(β2) remains correctly normalised. The complete ar-
gument is given in Box 9.1 but we can draw a useful analogy with changing
a three-dimensional vector so that the condition |r| = 1 is preserved; clearly
we have to move r on the unit sphere and the ﬁrst-order change in r is nec-
essarily perpendicular to the original value of r. The quantum-mechanical
normalisation condition implies that as β increases |E⟩moves on a hyper-
sphere in state space and ⟨E0|b⟩= 0. So we exclude |E0⟩from the sum in
(9.8) and have that the ﬁrst-order change to the stationary state is
|b⟩=
X
m̸=0
⟨Em|∆|E0⟩
E0 −Em
|Em⟩.
(9.10)
When this expression for |b⟩is inserted into equation (9.7), we have that the
second-order change in E is
Ec =
X
k̸=0
⟨E0|∆|Ek⟩⟨Ek|∆|E0⟩
E0 −Ek
.
(9.11)
9.1.1 Quadratic Stark eﬀect
Let’s apply the theory we’ve developed so far to a hydrogen atom that has
been placed in an electric ﬁeld E = −∇Φ. An externally imposed electric
ﬁeld is small compared to that inside an atom for ﬁeld strengths up to E ≃


206
Chapter 9: Perturbation theory
5 × 1011 V m−1 (Problem 8.6) so perturbation theory should yield a good
estimate of the shifts in energy level that ordinary ﬁelds eﬀect.
By the
deﬁnition of the electrostatic potential Φ, the ﬁeld changes the energy of the
atom by
δE = e{Φ(xp) −Φ(xe)},
(9.12)
where xp and xe are the position vectors of the proton and electron, respec-
tively. We assume that the ﬁeld changes very little on the scale of the atom,
and, as in §8.1, we deﬁne r ≡xe −xp. Then we may write
δE ≃−er · ∇Φ = er · E.
(9.13)
We orient our coordinate system so that E is parallel to the z axis and use
the notation E = |E|. Then it is clear that the eﬀect of imposing an external
electric ﬁeld is to add to the unperturbed Hamiltonian a term
∆= eEz.
(9.14)
Suppose the atom is in its ground state |100⟩, where the digits indicate the
values of n, l and m. Then from equation (9.6) the ﬁrst-order energy change
in E is
Eb = eE⟨100|z|100⟩.
(9.15)
In §4.1.4 we saw that the expectation value of any component of x vanishes
in a state of well-deﬁned parity. Since the ground-state ket |100⟩has well
deﬁned (even) parity, Eb = 0, and the change in E is dominated by the
second-order term Ec. For our perturbation to the ground state of hydrogen,
equation (9.11) becomes
Ec = e2E2
∞
X
n=2
X
l<n
|m|≤l
⟨100|z|nlm⟩⟨nlm|z|100⟩
E1 −En
.
(9.16)
Symmetry considerations make it possible to simplify this sum dramatically.
First, since [Lz, z] = 0 (Table 7.3), z|nlm⟩is an eigenfunction of Lz with
eigenvalue m, and therefore orthogonal to |100⟩unless m = 0. Therefore
in equation (9.16) only the terms with m = 0 contribute. Second, we can
delete from the sum over l all even values of l because, as we saw in §4.1.4,
the matrix elements of an odd-parity operator between states of the same
parity vanish. In fact, a result proved in Problem 7.21 shows that the terms
with l = 1 are the only non-vanishing terms in the sums over l in (9.16).
Thus
Ec = e2E2
∞
X
n=2
⟨100|z|n10⟩⟨n10|z|100⟩
E1 −En
.
(9.17)
It is easy to understand physically why the change in E is proportional
to E2. In response to the external electric ﬁeld, the probability density of the
atom’s charge changes by an amount that is proportional to the coeﬃcients
bk, and these coeﬃcients are proportional to E. That is, the ﬁeld polarises
the atom, generating a dipole moment P that is ∝E. The dipole’s energy is
−P · E, so the energy change caused by the ﬁeld is proportional to E2.
9.1.2 Linear Stark eﬀect and degenerate perturbation theory
Consider now the shift in the energy of the n = 2, l = 0 state of Hydrogen
when an electric ﬁeld is applied. The sum over k in (9.16) now includes the
term
⟨200|z|210⟩⟨210|z|200⟩
E20 −E21
,
which is inﬁnite if we neglect the very small Lamb shift (§8.1.3), because
the top is non-zero (Problem 8.12) and the diﬀerence of energies on the


9.1 Time-independent perturbations
207
bottom vanishes. It hardly seems likely that a negligible ﬁeld will produce
an arbitrarily large change in the energy of the ﬁrst excited state of hydrogen.
So what did we do wrong?
Our error was to assume at the outset that a small stimulus produces a
small response as we did when we wrote equations (9.2). Our inﬁnite con-
tribution to Ec can be traced to our expression (9.9) for bm, which diverges
as Em →E0. That is, the change in the wavefunction that a given ﬁeld pro-
duces is inversely proportional to the energy diﬀerence between the original
state |E0⟩and the state |Em⟩we are pushing the system towards. This is an
entirely reasonable result, analogous to what happens as we push a marble
that lies at the bottom of a bowl: the distance the marble moves before
coming into equilibrium depends on the curvature of the bowl. In the limit
that the curvature goes to zero, and the bottom of the bowl becomes ﬂat, an
inﬁnitesimal force will move the marble arbitrarily far, because all locations
have the same energy. So we conclude that when the system’s initial energy
is a degenerate eigenvalue Ed of H0, a tiny stimulus is liable to produce a big
change in the state (but not the energy) of the system. Disaster will attend
an attempt to calculate this abrupt change of state by the approach we have
been developing.
So must we just give up in despair? No, because we can see that the
only states that are going to acquire a non-negligible amplitude during the
abrupt change are ones that have the same energy as Ed. That is, the state
to which the system abruptly moves can be expressed as a linear combination
of the kets belonging to Ed. In many cases of interest there are only a small
number of these (four in the problem of hydrogen on which we are working).
What we have to do is to diagonalise the matrix ∆ij formed by ∆squeezed
between all pairs of these kets. The eigenkets of ∆in this small subspace
will be states of well-deﬁned energy in the slightly perturbed system. As β
is ramped up from zero to unity their energies will diverge from Ed. We
conjecture that in the instant that β departs from zero, the system’s state
jumps to the eigenket with the lowest energy, and subsequently stays in this
state as β increases. If this conjecture is correct, we should be able to use the
perturbation theory we have developed provided we use as basis kets ones
that diagonalise ∆as well as H0.
So let’s diagonalise eEz in the 4-dimensional subspace of Hydrogen kets
with n = 2. When we list the kets in the order |200⟩, |210⟩, |211⟩, |21−1⟩,
the matrix of ∆looks like this
∆ij = eE



0
a
0
0
a∗
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0



where
a = ⟨200|z|210⟩.
(9.18)
From Problem 8.12 we have that ⟨200|z|210⟩= −3a0. It is now easy to show
that the eigenvalues of ∆are ±3eEa0 and 0, while appropriate eigenkets are
2−1/2(1, ∓1, 0, 0), (0, 0, 1, 0) and (0, 0, 0, 1). We conclude that as soon as the
slightest perturbation is switched on, the system is in the state of lowest
energy, |ψ⟩= 2−1/2 |200⟩+ |210⟩

, and we use this state to determine Eb.
We ﬁnd
Eb = 1
2eE
 ⟨200| + ⟨210|

z
 |200⟩+ |210⟩

= −3a0eE.
(9.19)
From our discussion of the quadratic Stark eﬀect, we know that a change
in E that is proportional to E requires the dipole moment P of an atom to be
independent of E. Since Eb is proportional to E we conclude that a hydrogen
atom in the n = 2 state has a permanent electric dipole.
In classical physics this result is to be expected because the orbit of the
electron would in general be elliptical, and the time-averaged charge density
along the ellipse would be higher at the apocentre than at the pericentre,2 be-
cause the electron lingers at the apocentre and rushes through the pericentre.
2 An orbit’s apocentre is the point furthest from the attracting body, while the
pericentre is the point nearest that body.


208
Chapter 9: Perturbation theory
Figure 9.1 The charge distribu-
tion of the state (|200⟩+ |210⟩)/√2
is axisymmetric. Here we plot the
distribution in the (R, z) plane of
cylindrical polar coordinates.
Hence the centre of charge would lie on the opposite side of the geometrical
centre of the ellipse from the focus, where the proton’s cancelling charge lies.
Thus, if the electron’s orbit were a perfect Kepler ellipse, the atom would
have a permanent electric dipole moment parallel to the orbit’s major axis.
Any deviation of the radial force ﬁeld from F ∝r−2 will cause the major
axis of the ellipse to precess, and therefore the time-averaged polarisation of
the atom to be zero. In hydrogen the force-ﬁeld deviates verify little from
an inverse-square law, so the precession occurs very slowly in the classical
picture. Consequently, even a weak external ﬁeld can prevent precession and
thus give rise to a steady electric dipole.
In the quantum-mechanical picture, shielding shifts the energy of the S
state below that of the P states, thus ensuring that, in the absence of an
imposed ﬁeld, the atom is spherical and has no dipole moment. An electric
ﬁeld deprives L2 of its status as a constant of motion because the ﬁeld can
apply a torque to the atom.
Shielding is a very weak eﬀect in hydrogen
(because it relies on the vacuum’s virtual electrons and positrons), so the
S state lies very little below the P states and in even a weak electric ﬁeld
this oﬀset becomes irrelevant.
The lowest-energy state becomes (|200⟩+
|210⟩)/√2. This is not an eigenket of L2 but it is an eigenket of Lz with
eigenvalue zero. Thus its angular momentum is perpendicular to the ﬁeld,
as we expect from the classical picture of a Kepler ellipse with its major axis
parallel to E. Figure 9.1 shows that in this state the charge distribution
comprises a dense cloud around the origin and an extended cloud centred on
R = 0, z ≃−3a0. We can think of these clouds as arising from pericentre
and apocentre, respectively, of eccentric orbits that have their major axes
roughly aligned with the negative z axis. The integral
R
d3x, z|ψ|2 = −3a0,
so in this state the atom has dipole moment P = +3ea0.
9.1.3 Eﬀect of an external magnetic ﬁeld
When an atom is placed in a magnetic ﬁeld, the wavelengths of lines in
its spectrum change slightly.
Much of quantum mechanics emerged from
attempts to understand this phenomenon. We now use perturbation theory
to explain it.
In §3.3 we discussed the motion of a free particle in a uniform magnetic
ﬁeld. Our starting point was the Hamiltonian (3.31), which governs the mo-
tion of a free particle of mass m and charge Q in the magnetic ﬁeld produced


9.1 Time-independent perturbations
209
by the vector potential A. This is the Hamiltonian of a free particle, p2/2m,
with p replaced by p −QA. Hence we can incorporate the eﬀects of a mag-
netic ﬁeld on a hydrogen atom by replacing pn and pe in the gross-structure
Hamiltonian (8.1) with pp −eA and pe + eA, respectively. With Z = 1 the
kinetic energy term in the Hamiltonian then becomes
HKE ≡(pp −eA)2
2mp
+ (pe + eA)2
2me
=
p2
p
2mp
+ p2
e
2me
+ 1
2e
 pe
me
−pp
mp

· A + A ·
 pe
me
−pp
mp

+ O(A2)
(9.20)
We neglect the terms that are O(A2) on the grounds that when the ﬁeld is
weak enough for the O(A) terms to be small compared to the terms in the
gross-structure Hamiltonian, the O(A2) terms are negligible.
Equation (8.4) and the corresponding equation for ∂/∂xp imply that
pe =
me
me + mp
pX + pr
and
pp =
mp
me + mp
pX −pr,
(9.21)
where pX is the momentum associated with the centre of mass coordinate
X, while pr is the momentum of the reduced particle. From the algebra that
leads to equation (8.6a) we know that the ﬁrst two terms on the right of
the second line of equation (9.20) reduce to the kinetic energy of the centre-
of-mass motion and of the reduced particle. Using equations (9.21) in the
remaining terms on the right of equation (9.20) yields
HKE =
p2
X
2(me + mp) + p2
r
2µ + e
2µ(pr · A + A · pr),
(9.22)
where µ is the mass of the reduced particle (eq. 8.6b). It follows that an
external magnetic ﬁeld adds to the gross-structure Hamiltonian of a hydrogen
atom a perturbing Hamiltonian
HB = e
2µ(pr · A + A · pr).
(9.23)
On the scale of the atom the ﬁeld is likely to be eﬀectively homogeneous, so
we may take A = 1
2B × r (page 49). Then HB becomes
HB =
e
4me
(p · B × r + B × r · p),
(9.24)
where we have approximated µ by me and dropped the subscript on p.
The two terms in the bracket on the right can both be transformed into
B · r × p = ¯hB · L because (i) these scalar triple products involve only
products of diﬀerent components of the three vectors, and (ii) [xi, pj] = 0
for i̸ = j. Hence, we do not need to worry about the order of the r and
p operators and can exploit the usual invariance of a scalar triple product
under cyclic interchange of its vectors.
If an atom has more than one unpaired (‘valence’) electron, each electron
will contribute a term of this form to the overall Hamiltonian. We can fold
these separate contributions into a single contribution HB by interpreting L
as the sum of the angular-momentum operators of the individual electrons.
In §8.2.1 we discussed terms that must be added to hydrogen’s gross-
structure Hamiltonian to account for the eﬀects of the electron’s intrinsic
dipole moment. We found that the coupling with an external ﬁeld is gener-
ated by the Zeeman spin Hamiltonian (8.72). Adding this to the value of HB
that we have just computed, and orienting our coordinate system so that the
z axis is parallel to B, we arrive at our ﬁnal result, namely that a uniform
magnetic ﬁeld introduces a perturbation
HBs = e¯h
2me
B(Lz + 2Sz) = µBB(Jz + Sz),
(9.25)


210
Chapter 9: Perturbation theory
Figure 9.2 Eigenvalues of the spin-dependent Hamiltonian AL · S + B(Lz + 2Sz) as
functions of B/A for the case l = 1, s = 1
2. The right side of the diagram (ﬁeld strong
compared to spin-orbit coupling) quantiﬁes quantiﬁes the Paschen–Back eﬀect, while the
left side of the diagram quantiﬁes the Zeeman eﬀect (weak ﬁeld). The top and bottom
lines on the extreme right show the energies of the states |1, 1⟩|+⟩and |1, −1⟩|−⟩, which
are eigenstates of the full Hamiltonian for all values of B/A.
where S is the sum of the spin operators of all the valence electrons.
The Hamiltonian formed by adding HBs to the gross-structure Hamil-
tonian (8.1) commutes with L2, Lz, S2 and Sz. Its eigenkets are simply the
eigenkets of the gross-structure Hamiltonian upgraded to include eigenvalues
of S2 and Sz. The only diﬀerence from the situation we studied in §8.1 is
that the energies of these eigenkets now depend on both Lz and Sz. Hence,
each energy level of the gross-structure Hamiltonian is split by the magnetic
ﬁeld into as many sub-levels as ml + 2ms can take. For example, if l = 0
and s = 1
2, there are two sublevels, while when l = 1 and s = 1
2 there are
ﬁve levels in which ml + 2ms ranges between ±2.
In practice the perturbation HBs always acts in conjunction with the
spin-orbit perturbation HSO of equation (8.73).3 The general case in which
HBs and HSO are comparable, requires numerical solution. The extreme
cases in which one operator is larger than the other can be handled analyti-
cally.
Paschen–Back eﬀect
In a suﬃciently strong magnetic ﬁeld, HSO aﬀects
the atom much less than HBs, so HSO simply perturbs the eigenkets of the
Hamiltonian formed adding HBs to the gross-structure Hamiltonian. The
change in the energy of the state |n, l, ml, s, ms⟩is
Eb = ⟨n, l, ml, s, ms|HSO|n, l, ml, s, ms⟩
= ζ⟨n, l, ml, s, ms|L · S|n, l, ml, s, ms⟩,
(9.26)
where ζ is a number with dimensions of energy that is independent of ml
and ms. By writing L·S = 1
2(L+S−+ L−S+)+ LzSz (eq. 7.143) we see that
⟨L · S⟩= mlms. So in a strong magnetic ﬁeld the eigenenergies are
Egross + µBB(ml + 2ms) + ζmlms.
(9.27)
The levels on the extreme right of Figure 9.2 show the energies described by
this formula in the case that l = 1 and s = 1
2. The fact that in a strong
magnetic ﬁeld an atom’s energies depend on ml and ms in this way is known
as the Paschen–Back eﬀect.
Zeeman eﬀect
In a suﬃciently weak magnetic ﬁeld, HSO aﬀects the atom
more strongly than HBs. Then spin-orbit coupling assigns diﬀerent energies
3 There is no spin-orbit coupling for an S state, but an allowed spectral line from an S
state will connect to a P state for which there is spin-orbit coupling. Hence the frequencies
of allowed transitions inevitably involve spin-orbit coupling.


9.1 Time-independent perturbations
211
to states that diﬀer in j. Consequently, when we use perturbation theory
to calculate the smaller eﬀect of an imposed magnetic ﬁeld, the degenerate
eigenspace in which we have to work is that spanned by the states that have
given values of j, l and s but diﬀer in their eigenvalues m of Jz. Fortunately,
HBs is already diagonal within this space because [Jz, Sz] = 0. So the shift
in the energy of each state is simply
Eb = ⟨j, m, l, s|HBs|j, m, l, s⟩= µB
 m + ⟨j, m, l, s|Sz|j, m, l, s⟩

.
(9.28)
As we saw in §7.5, our basis states do not have well-deﬁned values of Sz
– in general they are linear combinations of eigenstates of Lz and Sz:
|j, m, l, s⟩=
s
X
m′=−s
cm′|l, m −m′⟩|s, m′⟩,
(9.29)
where the coeﬃcients cm′ are Clebsch–Gordan coeﬃcients (eq. 7.152). In any
concrete case it is straightforward to calculate the required expectation value
of Sz from this expansion. However, a diﬀerent approach yields a general
formula that was important historically.
In the classical picture, spin-orbit coupling causes the vector S to precess
around the invariant vector J. Hence, in this picture the expectation value of
S is equal to the projection of S onto J.4 The classical vector triple product
formula enables us to express S in terms of this projection:
J × (S × J) = J2S −(S · J)J
so
J2S = (S · J)J + J × (S × L).
(9.30)
In the classical picture, the expectation value of the vector triple product
on the right side vanishes. If its quantum expectation value were to vanish,
the expectation value of the z component of the equation would relate ⟨Sz⟩,
which we require, to the expectation values of operators that have the states
|j, m, l, s⟩as eigenstates, so our problem would be solved. Motivated by these
classical considerations, let’s investigate the operator
G ≡J × (S × L)
so
Gi ≡
X
jklm
ǫijkJjǫklmSlLm.
(9.31)
It is straightforward to check that its components commute with the angular-
momentum operators Ji in the way we expect the components of a vector to
do:
[Ji, Gj] = i
X
k
ǫijkGk.
(9.32)
From equation (9.31) it is also evident that J · G = 0. In Problem 7.21
identical conditions on the operators L and x suﬃce to prove that ⟨x⟩= 0 in
any state that is an eigenket of L2. So the steps of that proof can be retraced
with L replaced by J and x replaced by G to show that for the states of
interest ⟨G⟩= 0.
Now that we have established that the quantum-mechanical expectation
value of G does indeed vanish, we reinterpret equation (9.30) as an operator
equation, and, from the expectation value of its z component, deduce
⟨j, m, l, s|Sz|j, m, l, s⟩= ⟨J · S⟩m
j(j + 1) .
(9.33)
From equation (8.74) we have
J · S = L · S + S2 = 1
2(J2 −L2 + S2),
(9.34)
4 This heuristic argument is often referred to as the vector model.


212
Chapter 9: Perturbation theory
so we ﬁnd
EB = mgLµBB where gL ≡

1 + j(j + 1) −l(l + 1) + s(s + 1)
2j(j + 1)

.
(9.35)
The factor gL is called the Land´e g factor. In the early days of quantum
theory, when the Bohr atom was taken seriously, people expected the mag-
netic moment of an electron to be ±µB and therefore thought a magnetic
ﬁeld would shift energy levels by ±µBB. Equation (9.35) states that the
actual shift is mgL times this. When this factor diﬀered from unity, they
spoke of an anomalous Zeeman eﬀect.
The left hand side of Figure 9.2 shows the energy levels described by
equation (9.35) in the case l = 1, s = 1
2. The possible values of j are 3
2 and
1
2, and the magnetic ﬁeld splits each of these spin-orbit levels into 2j + 1
components.
9.2 Variational principle
We now describe a method of estimating energy levels, especially a system’s
ground-state energy, that does not involve breaking the Hamiltonian down
into a part that has known eigenkets and an additional perturbation. In
Chapter 10 we shall show that this method yields quite an accurate value
for the ionisation energy of helium.
Let H be the Hamiltonian for which we require the eigenvalues En and
the associated eigenkets |n⟩. We imagine expanding an arbitrary state |ψ⟩=
P
n an|n⟩as a linear combination of these eigenkets, and then calculate the
expectation value of H in this state as
⟨H⟩= ⟨ψ|H|ψ⟩=
P
i |ai|2Ei
P
j |aj|2 ,
(9.36)
where we have included the sum of the |aj|2 on the bottom to cover the
possibility that |ψ⟩is not properly normalised. ⟨H⟩is manifestly independent
of the phase of ai. We investigate the stationary points of ⟨H⟩with respect
to the moduli |ai| by diﬀerentiating equation (9.36) with respect to them:
∂⟨H⟩
∂|ak| = 2|ak|Ek
P
j |aj|2 −2|ak| P
i |ai|2Ei
P
j |aj|2
2
.
(9.37)
Equating this derivative to zero, we ﬁnd that the conditions for a stationary
point of ⟨H⟩are
0 = |ak|
 
Ek
X
i
|ai|2 −
X
i
|ai|2Ei
!
(k = 0, 1, . . .)
(9.38)
These equations are trivially solved by setting ak = 0 for every k, but then
|ψ⟩= 0 so the solution is of no interest. For any value of k for which ak̸ = 0,
we must have
Ek =
P
i |ai|2Ei
P
i |ai|2 .
(9.39)
Since the right side of this equation does not depend on k, the equation can
be satisﬁed for at most one value of k, and it clearly is satisﬁed if we set ai = 0
for i̸ = k and ak = 1, so |ψ⟩= |k⟩. This completes the proof of Rayleigh’s
theorem: The stationary points of the expectation value of an Hermitian
operator occur at the eigenstates of that operator. Moreover, all eigenstates
provide stationary points of the operator. That is, for general |ψ⟩the number


9.3 Time-dependent perturbation theory
213
of ⟨ψ|H|ψ⟩isn’t equal to an eigenvalue of H, but if ⟨ψ|H|ψ⟩is stationary
with respect to |ψ⟩in the sense that it doesn’t change when |ψ⟩is changed
by a small amount, Rayleigh’s theorem tells us that the number ⟨ψ|H|ψ⟩
is an eigenvalue of H. Problem 9.10 gives a geometrical interpretation of
Rayleigh’s theorem.
The stationary point associated with the ground state is a minimum of
⟨H⟩. To see that this is so, we subtract the ground-state energy E0 from
both sides of equation (9.36) and have
⟨H⟩−E0 =
P
i |ai|2(Ei −E0)
P
j |aj|2
.
(9.40)
Both the top and bottom of the fraction on the right are non-negative, so
⟨H⟩≥E0. The stationary points of ⟨H⟩associated with excited states are
saddle points (Problem 9.14).
The practical use of Rayleigh’s theorem is this. We write down a trial
wavefunction ψa(x) that depends on a number of parameters a1, . . . , aN.
These might, for example, be the coeﬃcients in an expansion of ψa as a
linear combination of some convenient basis functions ui(x)
ψa(x) ≡
N
X
i=1
aiui(x).
(9.41)
More often the ai are parameters in a functional form that is motivated
by some physical argument. For example, in Chapter 10 we will treat the
variable Z that appears in the hydrogenic wavefunctions of §8.1.2 as one of
the ai. Then we use ψa to calculate ⟨H⟩as a function of the ai and ﬁnd
the stationary points of this function. The minimum value of ⟨H⟩that we
obtain in this way clearly provides an upper limit on the ground-state energy
E0. Moreover, since ⟨H⟩is stationary for the ground-state wavefunction,
⟨H⟩−E0 increases only quadratically in the diﬀerence between ψa and the
ground-state wavefunction ψ0. Hence, with even a mediocre ﬁt to ψ0 this
upper limit will lie close to E0. This approach to ﬁnding eigenvalues and
eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian is called the variational principle.
In Problems 9.12 and 9.13 you can explore how the variational principle
works in a simple case.
9.3 Time-dependent perturbation theory
We now describe a way of obtaining approximate solutions to the tdse (2.26)
that we shall use to study both scattering of particles and the emission and
absorption of radiation by atoms and molecules.
Consider the evolution of a system that is initially in a state that is
nearly, but not quite, in a stationary state. Speciﬁcally, at t = 0 it is in the
Nth eigenstate of a Hamiltonian H0 that diﬀers by only a small, possibly
time-dependent, operator V from the true Hamiltonian H:
H = H0 + V.
(9.42)
Inspired by (2.32) we expand the solution to the tdse for this H in the form
|ψ⟩=
X
n
an(t)e−iEnt/¯h|En⟩,
(9.43)
where |En⟩is a (time-independent) eigenket of H0 with eigenvalue En. This
expansion doesn’t restrict |ψ⟩because {|En⟩} is a complete set and the func-
tions an(t) are arbitrary. Substituting it into the tdse we have
i¯h∂|ψ⟩
∂t
= (H0 + V )|ψ⟩=
X
n

En|En⟩+ V |En⟩

ane−iEnt/¯h
=
X
n
 i¯h˙an + Enan

e−iEnt/¯h|En⟩.
(9.44)


214
Chapter 9: Perturbation theory
We simplify this by multiplying through by ⟨Ek|:
i¯h˙ake−iEkt/¯h =
X
n
ane−iEnt/¯h⟨Ek|V |En⟩.
(9.45)
This constitutes a set of linear ordinary diﬀerential equations for the an(t)
which must be solved subject to the boundary conditions aN(0) = 1 and
an(0) = 0 for n̸ = N. Hence, at the earliest times the term on the right of
(9.45) with n = N will dominate the equation of motion of ak with k̸ = N,
and we have the approximation
˙ak ≃−i
¯he−i(EN−Ek)t/¯h⟨Ek|V |EN⟩.
(9.46)
We now assume that any time dependence of V takes the form V (t) = V0eiωt,
where V0 is a time-independent operator. This assumption is in practice not
very restrictive because the theory of Fourier analysis enables us to express
any operator of the form V0f(t), where f is an arbitrary function, as a linear
combination of sinusoidally varying operators.
Replacing V by V0eiωt in
equation (9.46) and integrating from t = 0 we ﬁnd
ak(t) =
⟨Ek|V0|EN⟩
EN −Ek −¯hω
h
e−i(EN−Ek−¯hω)t′/¯hit
0 ,
(9.47)
so the probability that after t the system has made the transition to the kth
eigenstate of H0 is
Pk(t) = |ak|2
=
|⟨Ek|V0|EN⟩|2
(EN −Ek −¯hω)2

2 −2 cos
(EN −Ek −¯hω)t
¯h

= 4|⟨Ek|V0|EN⟩|2 sin2 ((EN −Ek −¯hω)t/2¯h)
(EN −Ek −¯hω)2
.
(9.48)
For a time of order ¯h/(EN −Ek −¯hω) this expression grows like t2. Subse-
quently it oscillates.
9.3.1 Fermi golden rule
In many applications of equation (9.48), there are a large number of station-
ary states of H0 with energies Ek that lie within ¯h/t of
Eout ≡EN −¯hω,
(9.49)
and we are interested in the probability that the system has made the tran-
sition to any one of these states. Hence we sum the Pk over k. Let there
be g(Ek) dEk eigenvalues in the interval (Ek + dEk, Ek).
Then the total
transition probability is
X
k
Pk(t) = 4
Z
dEk g(Ek) |⟨Ek|V |EN⟩|2 sin2 ((Eout −Ek)t/2¯h)
(Eout −Ek)2
= 2
¯h
Z
dx g(Eout −2¯hx) |⟨Eout −2¯hx|V |EN⟩|2 sin2(xt)
x2
,
(9.50)
where we’ve introduced a new variable, x = (Eout −Ek)/2¯h. For given t,
the function ft(x) ≡sin2(xt)/x2 is dominated by a bump around the origin
that is of height t2 and width 2π/t.
Hence, the area under the bump is
proportional to t and in the limit of large t,
sin2(xt)
x2
∝tδ(x).
(9.51)


9.3 Time-dependent perturbation theory
215
We ﬁnd the constant of proportionality by diﬀerentiating
R
dx ft with respect
to t:
d
dt
Z ∞
−∞
dx sin2(xt)
x2
=
Z ∞
−∞
dx sin(2xt)
x
= π,
(9.52)
where we have used a result,
R
dx sin x/x = π, from the theory of contour
integration in the complex plane. Hence
lim
t→∞
sin2(xt)
x2
= πtδ(x).
(9.53)
Inserting this relation in (9.50) and integrating over x, we have ﬁnally
X
k
Pk = 2πt
¯h g(Eout) |⟨out|V |in⟩|2.
(9.54)
This equation establishes Fermi’s golden rule5 of perturbation theory: a
perturbation V eiωt causes a system to transition to a new state lower in
energy by ¯hω at a rate equal to 2π/¯h times the mod-square of the matrix
element of V between the initial and ﬁnal states times the density of states
at the ﬁnal energy.
It is easy to see that if the time-dependence of the
perturbation were e−iωt, it would cause transitions at the same rate to states
higher in energy by ¯hω.
9.3.2 Radiative transition rates
We now use equation (9.48) to calculate the rate at which a electromagnetic
waves induce an atom to make radiative transitions between discrete sta-
tionary states. Our treatment is valid when the quantum uncertainty in the
electromagnetic ﬁeld may be neglected, and the ﬁeld treated as a classical
object. This condition is satisﬁed, for example, in a laser, or at the focus of
the antenna of a radio telescope.
Whereas in our derivation of Fermi’s golden rule, we took the frequency
ω of the perturbation to be ﬁxed and assumed a continuum of ﬁnal states,
now that we are considering the case of a discrete ﬁnal state, we argue
that the electromagnetic ﬁeld is a superposition of plane waves of various
frequencies, and that we should sum the transition probability (9.48) that
each wave independently contributes. Thus we write
X
waves
Pk(t) = 4
X
waves
|⟨Ek|δV0|EN⟩|2 sin2 ((EN −Ek −¯hω)t/2¯h)
(EN −Ek −¯hω)2
,
(9.55)
where δV0 and ω relate to an individual wave.
In vacuo the electric ﬁeld of an electromagnetic wave is divergence free,
being entirely generated by Faraday’s law, ∇× E = −∂B/∂t. It follows that
the whole electromagnetic ﬁeld of the wave can be described by the vector
potential A through the equations
B = ∇× A
and
E = −∂A/∂t.
(9.56)
We are considering a superposition of plane waves, which individually have
a potential
δA(x, t) = δA0 cos(k · x −ωt),
(9.57)
where δA0 is a constant vector and k is the wavevector. From equations
(9.56) and (9.57) we have that the wave’s contribution to the electric ﬁeld is
δE(x, t) = −ωδA0 sin(k · x −ωt),
(9.58)
5 The golden rule was actually ﬁrst given by P.A.M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. A, 114,
243 (1927)


216
Chapter 9: Perturbation theory
so δE is parallel to δA0. From ∇· δE = 0 it follows that
k · δA0 = 0,
(9.59)
so k · δE = 0 and the wave is transverse.
In §9.1.3 we saw that an external electromagnetic ﬁeld adds to an atom’s
Hamiltonian the perturbing term (9.23) for each electron. In the present case
the perturbation is
δV (x, t) =
e
2me
{p · δA0 cos(k · x −ωt) + cos(k · x −ωt)δA0 · p}.
(9.60)
By virtue of equation (9.59), δA0·p commutes with k·x because a component
of momentum always commutes with a perpendicular component of position.
Since δA0 is a constant, it commutes with p. So we can simplify δV to
δV (x, t) =
e
me
δA0 · p cos(k · x −ωt)
=
e
2me
δA0 · p

ei(k·x−ωt) + e−i(k·x−ωt)
.
(9.61)
We now make the approximation that the electromagnetic wavelength
is much bigger than the characteristic size of the atom or molecule. This is
a good approximation providing the atom or molecule moves between states
that are separated in energy by much less than αmec2 (Problem 9.20), as
will be the case for waves with frequencies that are less than those of soft
X-rays. In this case we will have k · x ≪1 for all locations x in the atom
or molecule at which there is signiﬁcant probability of ﬁnding an electron.
When this condition is satisﬁed, it makes sense to expand the factors e±ik·x
in equation (9.61) as a power series and discard all but the constant term.
We then have
δV (x, t) =
e
2me
δA0 · p

e−iωt + eiωt
,
(9.62)
where we have retained the exponentials in time because large values of
t cannot be excluded in the way that we can exclude large values of x.
Finally, we note that in the gross-structure Hamiltonian H0, p occurs only
in the term p2/2me, so [H0, x] = −i(¯h/me)p. When we use this relation to
eliminate p from equation (9.62), we have
δV (x, t) = ieδA0
2¯h [H0, z](e−iωt + eiωt),
(9.63)
where we have chosen to make the z axis parallel to A0. Thus a plane elec-
tromagnetic wave gives rise to perturbations with both positive and negative
frequencies. Above we derived the frequency condition ω = (EN −Ek)/¯h
for transitions from |EN⟩to |Ek⟩, so the negative frequency perturbation
is associated with excitation of the system (Ek > EN), while the positive
frequency perturbation is associated with radiative decays.
We identify the time-independent part of δV as the operator δV0 that
occurs in equation (9.55) and then have that the net transition probability
is
X
waves
Pk(t) = e2
¯h2
X
waves
(δA0)2|⟨Ek|[H0, z]|EN⟩|2 sin2 ((EN −Ek −¯hω)t/2¯h)
(EN −Ek −¯hω)2
= e2
4¯h4 (Ek −EN)2|⟨Ek|z|EN⟩|2 X
waves
(δA0)2 sin2(xt)
x2
,
(9.64a)
where
x ≡(EN −Ek −¯hω)/2¯h.
(9.64b)


9.3 Time-dependent perturbation theory
217
Even though the expression
ρ =
1
2µ0
{(E/c)2 + B2}
(9.65)
for the energy density of an electromagnetic ﬁeld is quadratic in the ﬁeld
amplitudes E and B, the volume-averaged energy density of a superposition
of plane waves is just the sum of the energy densities of each individual
wave. Moreover, the electric and magnetic energy densities of a plane wave
are equal, so the energy density contributed by our plane wave is just twice
its electric energy density, and from equations (9.58) and (9.65) we infer that
our wave contributes the time-averaged energy density
δρ = ω2(δA0)2
2µ0c2
= 1
2ω2ǫ0(δA0)2,
(9.66)
where the second equality uses µ0c2 = 1/ǫ0. Using this expression to elimi-
nate δA0 from equation (9.64a), we obtain
X
waves
Pk(t) =
e2
2ǫ0¯h4 (Ek −EN)2|⟨Ek|z|EN⟩|2 X
waves
δρsin2(xt)
ω2x2
.
(9.67)
Let ρ(ω) be the power contained in all waves that have frequencies less than
ω. In symbols
ρ(ω) ≡
X
waves with ω′<ω
δρω′.
(9.68)
Then
X
waves
δρ =
Z
dω dρ
dω .
(9.69)
When we use this expression to replace the sum on the right side of equation
(9.67) by an integral, and we use equation (9.64b) to replace dω with −2dx,
we obtain
X
waves
Pk(t) =
e2
ǫ0¯h4 (Ek −EN)2|⟨Ek|z|EN⟩|2
Z
dx dρ
dω
sin2(xt)
ω2x2
.
(9.70)
We now let t become large and exploit equation (9.53) to evaluate the inte-
gral. The result is
X
waves
Pk(t) = t πe2
ǫ0¯h2 |⟨Ek|z|EN⟩|2 dρ
dω

ω=(EN−Ek)/¯h
.
(9.71)
The coeﬃcient of t on the right of this equation gives the rate R at which
transitions occur. When we express the cumulative energy density of the
wave-ﬁeld in terms of frequency ν rather than angular frequency ω and use
equation to eliminate ǫ0 in favour of the Bohr radius, the rate becomes
R =
2π
a0me
|⟨Ek|z|EN⟩|2 dρ
dν

ν=|EN−Ek|/h
.
(9.72)
When Ek > EN, the negative-frequency term in equation (9.62) gives
rise to excitations at an identical rate. Thus we have recovered from a dynam-
ical argument Einstein’s famous result that stimulated emission of photons
occurs, and that the coeﬃcient B that controls the rate of stimulated emis-
sion is equal to the absorption coeﬃcient (Box 9.2). Einstein’s prediction
of stimulated emission led 38 years later to the demonstration of a maser
(§5.2.1) and 44 years later to the construction of the ﬁrst laser by Theodore


218
Chapter 9: Perturbation theory
Box 9.2:
Einstein A and B Coeﬃcients
In 1916, when only the merest fragments of quantum physics were known,
Einstein showed (Verh. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. 18, 318) that systems must
be capable of both spontaneous and stimulated emission of photons, and
that the coeﬃcient of stimulated emission must equal that for absorption
of a photon.
He obtained these results by requiring that in thermal
equilibrium there are equal rates of absorption and emission of photons
of a given frequency ν by an ensemble of systems.
He considered a
frequency ν for which hν = ∆E, the energy diﬀerence between two states
|1⟩and |2⟩of the systems. The rate of absorptions he assumed to be
Nabs = BaN1(dρ/dν), where Ba is the absorption coeﬃcient, N1 is the
number of systems in the state |1⟩, and (dρ/dν) is the energy density
in radiation of frequency ν.
The rate of emissions he assumed to be
Nem = BeN2(dρ/dν) + AN2, where Be is the coeﬃcient for induced
emission and A is that for spontaneous emission. Equating Nabs to Nem
yields
0 = (BeN2 −BaN1)dρ
dν + AN2.
In thermal equilibrium N1 = N2ehν/kT and dρ/dν is given by the Planck
function.
Using these relations to eliminate N1 and dρ/dν and then
cancelling N2, we ﬁnd
0 = (Be −Baehν/kT )
8πhν3
c3(ehν/kT −1) −A.
In the limit of very large T , ehν/kT →1, so the factor multiplying the
bracket with the Bs becomes large, and the contents of this bracket tends
to Be −Ba. It follows that these coeﬃcients must be equal. We therefore
drop the subscripts on them, take B out of the bracket, cancel the factors
with exponentials, and ﬁnally deduce that
A = 8πh(ν/c)3B.
(1)
Maiman.6 In view of this history, it’s a remarkable fact that a laser operates
in the regime in which the electromagnetic ﬁeld can be treated as a classical
object, as we have done here. Emission of light by a humble candle, by con-
trast, is an inherently quantum-mechanical phenomenon because it occurs
through spontaneous emission. Our treatment does not include spontaneous
emission because we have neglected the quantum uncertainty in the elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld. This uncertainty endows the ﬁeld with zero-point energy
(§3.1), and spontaneous emission can be thought of as emission stimulated
by the zero-point energy of the electromagnetic ﬁeld.
Using the argument given in Box 9.2, Einstein was able to relate the
coeﬃcient A of spontaneous emission to B. Einstein’s argument does not
yield a numerical value for either A or B. Our quantum mechanical treatment
has yielded a value for B, and with Einstein’s relation (eq. 1 in Box 9.2)
between B and A we can infer the value of A:
A = 16π2hν3
c3a0me
|⟨Ek|z|EN⟩|2.
(9.73)
From this we can estimate the typical lifetime for radiative decay from an
excited state of an atom.
When the radiation density ρ is very small, the number N2 of atoms in
an excited state obeys ˙N2 = −AN2 (Box 9.2), so N2 decays exponentially
6 The word ‘laser’ is an acronym for “light ampliﬁcation by stimulated emission”.
Curiously Maiman’s paper (Nature, 187, 493 (1960)) about his laser was rejected by the
Physical Review.


9.3 Time-dependent perturbation theory
219
with a characteristic time A−1.
Unless some symmetry condition causes
the matrix element in equation (9.73) to vanish, we expect the value of the
matrix element to be ∼a0. So the characteristic radiative lifetime of a state
is
τ = A−1 = mec2
hν
λ
a0
1
16π2ν .
(9.74)
For an optical transition, hν ∼2 eV, λ ∼650 nm ∼1.2 × 104a0, and ν ∼
4.6 × 1014 Hz, so τ ∼4 × 10−8 s. It follows that ∼107 oscillations of the
atom occur before the radiation of energy causes the atom to slump into the
lower state.
9.3.3 Selection rules
Equation (9.72) states that the rate of radiative transitions is proportional
to the mod-square of the electric dipole operator ez. For this reason the
approximation we made, that k · x ≪1, is called the electric dipole ap-
proximation.
There are important circumstances in which symmetry causes the matrix
element of the dipole operator to vanish between the initial and ﬁnal states.
Transitions between such states are said to be forbidden in contrast to al-
lowed transitions, for which the matrix element does not vanish. Some
approximations were involved in our derivation of equation (9.72), so the
transition rate does not necessarily vanish completely when the matrix ele-
ment is zero. In fact, forbidden transitions often do occur, but at rates that
are much smaller than the characteristic rate of allowed transitions (eq. 9.74)
because the rate of a forbidden transition is proportional to terms that we
could neglect in the derivation of equation (9.72). We now investigate rela-
tions between the initial and ﬁnal states that must be satisﬁed if the states
are to be connected by an allowed transition. Such relations are called se-
lection rules. The slower rate of forbidden transitions must be determined
by either including the next term of the Taylor expansion of eik·x, or taking
into account the perturbation µBS · B that arises from the interaction of the
intrinsic magnetic moment of an electron with the wave’s magnetic ﬁeld.
We are interested in matrix elements between states that are eigenstates
of operators that commute with the Hamiltonian H that the atom would
have if it were decoupled from electromagnetic waves.
The Hamiltonian
should include spin-orbit coupling as well as interaction with whatever steady
external electric or magnetic ﬁelds are being applied. The operator in the
matrix element is the component of the position operator parallel to the
electric ﬁeld of the radiation that is being either absorbed or emitted.
Even in the presence of an external ﬁeld, the angular-momentum parallel
to the ﬁeld, which we may call Jz, commutes with H, so the kets of interest
are labelled with m. Since [Jz, z] = 0, the ket z|E, m⟩is an eigenket of Jz
with eigenvalue m. It follows that ⟨E, m|z|E′, m′⟩= 0 unless m = m′. This
gives us the ﬁrst selection rule listed in Table 9.1, namely that when the
electric vector of the radiation is parallel to the imposed ﬁeld, the quantum
number m is unchanged by radiation.
If we deﬁne x± = x ± iy, we have
[Jz, x±] = iy ± i(−ix) = ±x±.
(9.75)
It follows that x±|E, m⟩is an eigenket of Jz with eigenvalue m ± 1, so
⟨E, m|x|E′, m′⟩= 1
2⟨E, m|(x+ + x−)|E′, m′⟩
= 0 unless m′ = m ± 1.
(9.76)
Obviously the same result applies to the matrix element for y. Hence we
have the second selection rule listed in Table 9.1: when the electric vector of
the radiation is perpendicular to the imposed ﬁeld, the quantum number m
changes by ±1. If the direction of observation is along the imposed ﬁeld, the


220
Problems
Table 9.1
Selection rules
j
|j −j′| ≤1 but j = 0̸ →j′ = 0
m
|m −m′| ≤1; m = m′ for E parallel to an external ﬁeld;
|m −m′| = 1 for photon emitted parallel to an external ﬁeld
l
|l −l′| = 1
s
s = s′
electric vector of the radiation must be perpendicular to the ﬁeld. Hence,
in this case m must change by ±1. In fact, m increases when a left-hand
circularly-polarised photon is emitted in the positive z direction, and con-
versely for the emission of a right-hand polarised photon. When the direction
of observation is perpendicular to the imposed ﬁeld, the electric vector of the
radiation can be either perpendicular to the ﬁeld, in which case m changes
by ±1, or parallel to the ﬁeld, and then m does not change.
When there is no imposed ﬁeld, m may be unchanged or change by ±1,
and we can observe photons associated with any of these changes in m when
observing from any direction.
When there is no imposed ﬁeld, J2 commutes with H and the kets
of interest are labelled with E, j and m. The selection rule for j can be
obtained from the rules for adding angular momentum that were discussed
in §7.5: ⟨E, j, m|xk|E′, j′, m′⟩vanishes unless it is possible to make a spin-j
object by adding a spin-one object to a spin-j′ object. For example, the
matrix element vanishes if j = j′ = 0 because spin-one is all you can get by
adding a spin-one system to a spin-zero one. Subject to the selection rules on
m just discussed, the matrix element does not vanish if j = 0 and j′ = 1, or if
j = 1 and j′ = 1, because both a spin-zero system and a spin-one one can be
obtained by adding two spin-one subsystems. The matrix element vanishes
if j = 1 and j′ = 3 because by adding spin-one and spin-three the smallest
spin you can get is spin-two. In summary, the selection rule is |j −j′| ≤1
except that j = 0 →j′ = 0 is forbidden.
The selection rules for j that we have just given follow from a powerful
result of group theory, the Wigner-Eckart theorem.
Unfortunately, a
signiﬁcant amount of group theory is required to prove this theorem.
In
Appendix J we give a proof of the selection rule for j that builds on the
calculation involved in Problem 7.21.
When spin-orbit coupling is weak, the total orbital angular momentum
L2 and the total spin angular momentum S2 are constants of motion, so
their quantum numbers l and s are likely to appear as labels in the kets.
Since [x, S] = 0, it is clear that the selection rule for s is that it should not
change. The selection rule for l was derived in Problem 7.21: |l −l′| = 1.
Problems
9.1
A harmonic oscillator with mass m and angular frequency ω is per-
turbed by δH = ǫx2.
(a) What is the exact change in the ground-state
energy? Expand this change in powers of ǫ up to order ǫ2. (b) Show that
the change given by ﬁrst-order perturbation theory agrees with the exact
result to O(ǫ) (c) Show that the ﬁrst-order change in the ground state is
|b⟩= −(ǫℓ2/√2¯hω)|E2⟩. (d) Show that second-order perturbation theory
yields energy change Ec = −ǫ2¯h/4m2ω3 in agreement with the exact result.
9.2
The harmonic oscillator of Problem 9.1 is perturbed by δH = ǫx. Show
that the perturbed Hamiltonian can be written
H =
1
2m

p2 + m2ω2X2 −ǫ2
ω2

,
where X = x+ǫ/mω2 and hence deduce the exact change in the ground-state
energy. Interpret these results physically.


Problems
221
What value does ﬁrst-order perturbation theory give? From perturba-
tion theory determine the coeﬃcient b1 of the unperturbed ﬁrst-excited state
in the perturbed ground state. Discuss your result in relation to the exact
ground state of the perturbed oscillator.
9.3
The harmonic oscillator of Problem 9.1 is perturbed by δH = ǫx4.
Show that the ﬁrst-order change in the energy of the nth excited state is
δE = 3(2n2 + 2n + 1)ǫ

¯h
2mω
2
.
(9.77)
Hint: express x in terms of A + A†.
9.4
The inﬁnite square-well potential V (x) = 0 for |x| < a and ∞for
|x| > a is perturbed by the potential δV = ǫx/a. Show that to ﬁrst order in
ǫ the energy levels of a particle of mass m are unchanged. Show that even
to this order the ground-state wavefunction is changed to
ψ1(x) =
1
√a cos(πx/2a) +
16ǫ
π2E1
√a
X
n=2,4,
(−1)n/2
n
(n2 −1)3 sin(nπx/2a),
where E1 is the ground-state energy. Explain physically why this wavefunc-
tion does not have well-deﬁned parity but predicts that the particle is more
likely to be found on one side of the origin than the other. State with rea-
sons but without further calculation whether the second-order change in the
ground-state energy will be positive or negative.
9.5
An atomic nucleus has a ﬁnite size, and inside it the electrostatic
potential Φ(r) deviates from Ze/(4πǫr).
Take the proton’s radius to be
ap ≃10−15 m and its charge density to be uniform. Then treating the dif-
ference between Φ and Ze/(4πǫ0r) to be a perturbation on the Hamiltonian
of hydrogen, calculate the ﬁrst-order change in the ground-state energy of
hydrogen. Why is the change in the energy of any P state extremely small?
Comment on how the magnitude of this energy shift varies with Z in hydro-
genic ions of charge Z. Hint: exploit the large diﬀerence between ap and a0
to approximate the integral you formally require.
9.6
Evaluate the Land´e g factor for the case l = 1, s = 1
2 and relate your
result to Figure 9.2.
9.7
A particle of mass m moves in the potential V (x, y) = 1
2mω2(x2 + y2),
where ω is a constant. Show that the Hamiltonian can be written as the
sum Hx +Hy of the Hamiltonians of two identical one-dimensional harmonic
oscillators. Write down the particle’s energy spectrum. Write down kets
for two stationary states in the ﬁrst-excited level in terms of the stationary
states |nx⟩of Hx and |ny⟩of Hy. Show that the nth excited level is n + 1
fold degenerate.
The oscillator is disturbed by a small potential H1 = λxy. Show that
this perturbation lifts the degeneracy of the ﬁrst excited level, producing
states with energies 2¯hω ± λ¯h/2mω. Give expressions for the corresponding
kets.
The mirror operator M is deﬁned such that for any state |ψ⟩, ⟨x, y|M|ψ⟩=
⟨y, x|ψ⟩.
Explain physically the relationship between the states |ψ⟩and
M|ψ⟩. Show that [M, H1] = 0. Show that MHx = HyM and thus that
[M, H] = 0. What do you infer from these commutation relations?
9.8∗
The Hamiltonian of a two-state system can be written
H =

A1 + B1ǫ
B2ǫ
B2ǫ
A2

,
(9.78)
where all quantities are real and ǫ is a small parameter. To ﬁrst order in ǫ,
what are the allowed energies in the cases (a) A1̸ = A2, and (b) A1 = A2?
Obtain the exact eigenvalues and recover the results of perturbation
theory by expanding in powers of ǫ.


222
Problems
Figure 9.3 The relation of input
and output vectors of a 2 × 2 Hermi-
tian matrix with positive eigenvalues
λ1 > λ2. An input vector (X, Y ) on
the unit circle produces the output
vector (x, y) that lies on the ellipse
that has the eigenvalues as semi-
axes.
9.9∗
For the P states of hydrogen, obtain the shift in energy caused by a
weak magnetic ﬁeld (a) by evaluating the Land´e g factor, and (b) by use
equation (9.28) and the Clebsch–Gordan coeﬃcients calculated in §7.5.2.
9.10
The 2 × 2 Hermitian matrix H has positive eigenvalues λ1 > λ2. The
vectors (X, Y ) and (x, y) are related by
H ·

X
Y

=

x
y

.
Show that the points (λ1X, λ2Y ) and (x, y) are related as shown in Figure 9.3.
How does this result generalise to 3 × 3 matrices? Explain the relation of
Rayleigh’s theorem to this result.
9.11
We ﬁnd an upper limit on the ground-state energy of the harmonic
oscillator from the trial wavefunction ψ(x) = (a2 + x2)−1. Using the substi-
tution x = a tan θ, or otherwise, show that
Z ∞
0
dx |ψ|2 = 1
4πa−3
Z ∞
0
dx x2|ψ|2 = 1
4πa−1
Z ∞
0
dx ψ∗p2ψ = 1
8πa−5
(9.79)
Hence show that ⟨ψ|H|ψ⟩/⟨ψ|ψ⟩is minimised by setting a = 2l/4ℓ, where ℓis
the characteristic length of the oscillator. Show that our upper limit on E0
is ¯hω/√2. Plot the the ﬁnal trial wavefunction and the actual ground-state
wavefunction and (a) say whether you consider it a good ﬁt, and (b) how it
might be adapted into a better trial wavefunction.
9.12
Show that for the unnormalised spherically-symmetric wavefunction
ψ(r) the expectation value of the gross-structure Hamiltonian of hydrogen is
⟨H⟩=
 
¯h2
2me
Z
dr r2

dψ
dr

2
−
e2
4πǫ0
Z
dr r|ψ|2
! , Z
dr r2|ψ|2.
(9.80)
For the trial wavefunction ψb = e−br show that
⟨H⟩= ¯h2b2
2me
−e2b
4πǫ0
,
and hence recover the deﬁnitions of the Bohr radius and the Rydberg con-
stant.
9.13∗
Using the result proved in Problem 9.12, show that the trial wave-
function ψb = e−b2r2/2 yields −8/(3π)R as an estimate of hydrogen’s ground-
state energy, where R is the Rydberg constant.
9.14
Show that the stationary point of ⟨ψ|H|ψ⟩associated with an excited
state of H is a saddle point. Hint: consider the state |ψ⟩= cos θ|k⟩+sin θ|l⟩,
where θ is a parameter.


Problems
223
9.15
At early times (t ∼−∞) a harmonic oscillator of mass m and natural
angular frequency ω is in its ground state. A perturbation δH = Exe−t2/τ 2
is then applied, where E and τ are constants.
a. What is the probability according to ﬁrst-order theory that by late times
the oscillator transitions to its second excited state, |2⟩?
b. Show that to ﬁrst order in δH the probability that the oscillator tran-
sitions to the ﬁrst excited state, |1⟩, is
P = πE2τ 2
2m¯hω e−ω2τ 2/2,
(9.81)
c. Plot P as a function of τ and comment on its behaviour as ωτ →0 and
ωτ →∞.
9.16
A particle of mass m executes simple harmonic motion at angular
frequency ω. Initially it is in its ground state but from t = 0 its motion is
disturbed by a steady force F. Show that at time t > 0 and to ﬁrst order in
F the state is
|ψ, t⟩= e−iE0t/¯h|0⟩+ a1e−iE1t/¯h|1⟩
where
a1 =
i
√
2m¯hω
Z t
0
dt′ F(t′)eiωt′.
Calculate ⟨x⟩(t) and show that your expression coincides with the classical
solution
x(t) =
Z t
0
dt′ F(t′)G(t −t′),
where the Green’s function is G(t −t′) = sin[ω(t −t′)]/mω. Show that a
suitable displacement of the point to which the oscillator’s spring is anchored
could give rise to the perturbation.
9.17∗
A particle of mass m is initially trapped by the well with potential
V (x) = −Vδδ(x), where Vδ > 0. From t = 0 it is disturbed by the time-
dependent potential v(x, t) = −Fxe−iωt. Its subsequent wavefunction can
be written
|ψ⟩= a(t)e−iE0t/¯h|0⟩+
Z
dk {bk(t)|k, e⟩+ ck(t)|k, o⟩} e−iEkt/¯h,
(9.82)
where E0 is the energy of the bound state |0⟩and Ek ≡¯h2k2/2m and |k, e⟩
and |k, o⟩are, respectively the even- and odd-parity states of energy Ek (see
Problem 5.17). Obtain the equations of motion
i¯h

˙a|0⟩e−iE0t/¯h +
Z
dk

˙bk|k, e⟩+ ˙ck|k, o⟩

e−iEkt/¯h

= v

a|0⟩e−iE0t/¯h +
Z
dk (bk|k, e⟩+ ck|k, o⟩) e−iEkt/¯h

.
(9.83)
Given that the free states are normalised such that ⟨k′, o|k, o⟩= δ(k −k′),
show that to ﬁrst order in v, bk = 0 for all t, and that
ck(t) = iF
¯h ⟨k, o|x|0⟩eiΩkt/2 sin(Ωkt/2)
Ωk/2
,
where
Ωk ≡Ek −E0
¯h
−ω.
(9.84)
Hence show that at late times the probability that the particle has become
free is
Pfr(t) = 2πmF 2t
¯h3
|⟨k, o|x|0⟩|2
k

Ωk=0
.
(9.85)


224
Problems
Given that from Problem 5.17 we have
⟨x|0⟩= √Ke−K|x|
where
K = mVδ
¯h2
and
⟨x|k, o⟩=
1
√π sin(kx),
(9.86)
show that
⟨k, o|x|0⟩=
r
K
π
4kK
(k2 + K2)2 .
(9.87)
Hence show that the probability of becoming free is
Pfr(t) = 8¯hF 2t
mE2
0
p
Ef/|E0|
(1 + Ef/|E0|)4 ,
(9.88)
where Ef > 0 is the ﬁnal energy.
Check that this expression for Pfr is
dimensionless and give a physical explanation of the general form of the
energy-dependence of Pfr(t)
9.18∗
A particle travelling with momentum p = ¯hk > 0 from −∞encoun-
ters the steep-sided potential well V (x) = −V0 < 0 for |x| < a. Use the Fermi
golden rule to show that the probability that a particle will be reﬂected by
the well is
Preﬂect ≃V 2
0
4E2 sin2(2ka),
where E = p2/2m. Show that in the limit E ≫V0 this result is consistent
with the exact reﬂection probability derived in Problem 5.10. Hint: adopt
periodic boundary conditions so the wavefunctions of the in and out states
can be normalised.
9.19∗
Show that the number states g(E) dE d2Ωwith energy in (E, E+dE)
and momentum in the solid angle d2Ωaround p = ¯hk of a particle of mass
m that moves freely subject to periodic boundary conditions on the walls of
a cubical box of side length L is
g(E) dE d2Ω=
 L
2π
3 m3/2
¯h3
√
2E dE dΩ2.
(9.89)
Hence show from Fermi’s golden rule that the cross section for elastic scat-
tering of such particles by a weak potential V (x) from momentum ¯hk into
the solid angle d2Ωaround momentum ¯hk′ is
dσ =
m2
(2π)2¯h4 d2Ω

Z
d3x ei(k−k′)·xV (x)

2
.
(9.90)
Explain in what sense the potential has to be “weak” for this Born approx-
imation to the scattering cross section to be valid.
9.20
Given that a0 = ¯h/(αmec) show that the product a0k of the Bohr
radius and the wavenumber of a photon of energy E satisﬁes
a0k =
E
αmec2 .
(9.91)
Hence show that the wavenumber kα of an Hα photon satisﬁes a0kα =
5
72α
and determine λα/a0. What is the connection between this result and our
estimate that ∼107 oscillations are required to complete a radiative decay.
Does it imply anything about the way the widths of spectral lines from
allowed atomic transitions varies with frequency?
9.21
Equation (9.75) implies that x± act as ladder operators for Jz. Why
did we not use these operators in §7.1?


Problems
225
9.22
Given that a system’s Hamiltonian is of the form
H =
p2
2me
+ V (x)
(9.92)
show that [x, [H, x]] = ¯h2/me. By taking the expectation value of this ex-
pression in the state |k⟩, show that
X
n̸=k
|⟨n|x|k⟩|2(En −Ek) = ¯h2
2me
,
(9.93)
where the sum runs over all the other stationary states.
The oscillator strength of a radiative transition |k⟩→|n⟩is deﬁned
to be
fkn ≡2me
¯h2 (En −Ek)|⟨n|x|k⟩|2
(9.94)
Show that P
n fkn = 1. What is the signiﬁcance of oscillator strengths for
the allowed radiative transition rates of atoms?


10
Helium and the periodic table
In this chapter we build on the foundations laid by our study of hydrogen in
Chapter 8 to understand how the atoms of heavier elements work. Most of
the essential ideas already emerged in Chapter 8. In fact, only one impor-
tant point of principle needs to be introduced before we can move down the
periodic table understanding why elements have the spectra and chemistry
that they do. This outstanding issue is the remarkable implications that
quantum mechanics carries for the way in which identical particles interact
with one another. We shall be concerned with the case in which the parti-
cles are electrons, but the principles we elucidate apply much more widely,
for example, to the dynamics of the three quarks that make up a proton or
neutron, or the two oxygen atoms that comprise an oxygen molecule.
10.1 Identical particles
Consider a system that contains two identical spinless particles.
Then a
complete set of amplitudes is given by a function ψ of the coordinates x and
x′ of the particles: the complex number ψ(x, x′) is the amplitude to ﬁnd one
particle at x and the other particle at x′. What’s the physical interpretation
of the number ψ(x′, x)? It also gives the amplitude to ﬁnd particles at x and
x′. If the particles were not identical – if one where a pion the other a kaon,
for example – ﬁnding the pion at x and the kaon at x′ would be a physically
distinct situation from ﬁnding the kaon at x and the pion at x′.
But if
both particles are pions, ψ(x, x′) and ψ(x′, x) are amplitudes for identical
physical situations. Does it follow that ψ(x, x′) = ψ(x′, x)? No, because
experimentally we can only test the probabilities to which these amplitudes
give rise. So we can only safely argue that the probability |ψ(x, x′)|2 must
equal the probability |ψ(x′, x)|2, or equivalently that
ψ(x, x′) = eiφψ(x′, x),
(10.1)
where φ is a real number. This equation must hold for any x and x′. So the
function ψ has the property that if you swap its arguments, you increment
its phase by φ. Speciﬁcally
ψ(x′, x) = eiφψ(x, x′).
(10.2)


10.1 Identical particles
227
Substituting this equation into the right side of equation (10.1), it follows
that
ψ(x, x′) = e2iφψ(x, x′),
(10.3)
which implies that either φ = 0 or φ = π. Thus we have shown that the
wavefunction for a system of two identical spinless particles has to be either
symmetric or antisymmetric under interchange of the particles’ coordinates.
Consider now the case of two spin-s particles, which might, for example,
be electrons (s = 1
2) or photons (s = 1). A complete set of amplitudes would
be the amplitude for one particle to be at x in the state that has eigenvalue
m of Sz, and the other particle to be at x′ with eigenvalue m′.
Let the
complex number ψmm′(x, x′) denote this amplitude – that is, let the ﬁrst
subscript on ψ give the orientation of the spin of the particle that is found
at the position given by the ﬁrst argument of ψ. Then the possibly diﬀerent
amplitude ψm′m(x′, x) is for the identical physical situation. Hence
ψm′m(x′, x) = eiφψmm′(x, x′).
(10.4)
This equation must hold for all m, m′ and x, x′. So swapping the subscripts
on ψ at the same time as swapping the arguments, is equivalent to multiply-
ing through by eiφ. Swapping a second time leads to
ψmm′(x, x′) = e2iφψmm′(x, x′),
(10.5)
so, as in the case of spin-zero particles, either φ = 0 or φ = π. It turns out
that there is no change of sign if the particles are bosons (s = 0, 1, 2, . . .), and
there is a change of sign if the particles are fermions (s = 1
2, 3
2, . . .). That is
ψmm′(x, x′) =

−ψm′m(x′, x)
for fermions
+ψm′m(x′, x)
for bosons.
(10.6)
These relations between amplitudes are said to arise from the principle of
exchange symmetry between identical particles.
Generalisation to the case of N identical particles
If our system
contains N identical fermions, the wavefunction will change its sign when we
swap the arguments (both spin quantum numbers and spatial coordinates)
associated with any two slots in the wavefunction. Similarly, if the system
contains N bosons, the wavefunction will be invariant when we swap the
arguments associated with any two slots.
10.1.1 Pauli exclusion principle
An immediate consequence of the wavefunction of fermions being antisym-
metric under a swap of its arguments, is that there is zero probability of
ﬁnding two fermions with their spins oriented in the same way at the same
location: since ψmm(x, x) = −ψmm(x, x), the amplitude ψmm(x, x) must
vanish. Since wavefunctions are continuous functions of position, and their
spatial derivatives are constrained in magnitude by the particles’ momenta,
ψmm(x, x′) can vanish at x = x′ only if it is small whenever the two argu-
ments are nearly equal. Hence, fermions with similarly oriented spins avoid
each other; they are anticorrelated. This fact has profound implications
for atomic and condensed-matter physics.
If the particles’ spins have diﬀerent orientations, there can be a non-
zero amplitude of ﬁnding them at the same location: from ψmm′(x, x) =
−ψm′m(x, x) it does not follow that the amplitude ψmm′(x, x) vanishes.
The principle of exchange symmetry arises as a constraint on amplitudes,
but we now show that it has implications for the structure of the underlying
states. Let {|n⟩} be a complete set of states for a single fermion – so the
label n carries information about both the electron’s motion in space and


228
Chapter 10: Helium and the periodic table
its orientation (spin state). Then from §6.1 we have that any state of an
electron pair can be expanded in the form1
|ψ⟩=
X
nn′
ann′|n⟩|n′⟩.
(10.7)
Multiplying through by ⟨x, x′, m, m′| we obtain the amplitude ψmm′(x, x′)
that is constrained by exchange symmetry:
ψmm′(x, x′) = ⟨x, x′, m, m′|ψ⟩=
X
nn′
ann′⟨x, m|n⟩⟨x′, m′|n′⟩.
(10.8)
We now swap x, m with x′, m′ throughout the equation and add the result
to our existing equation. Then by exchange symmetry the left side vanishes,
and we have
0 =
X
nn′
ann′⟨x, m|n⟩⟨x′, m′|n′⟩+
X
nn′
ann′⟨x′, m′|n⟩⟨x, m|n′⟩.
(10.9)
In the second sum we may swap the labels n and n′ (since they are be-
ing summed over), and we may also reverse the order of the amplitudes
⟨x′, m′|n′⟩and ⟨x, m|n⟩(because they are mere complex numbers). Then we
have
0 =
X
nn′
ann′⟨x, m|n⟩⟨x′, m′|n′⟩+
X
n′n
an′n⟨x, m|n⟩⟨x′, m′|n′⟩
=
X
nn′
⟨x, m|n⟩⟨x′, m′|n′⟩(ann′ + an′n)
= ⟨x, x′, m, m′|
X
nn′
|n⟩|n′⟩(ann′ + an′n).
(10.10)
Since this equation holds for arbitrary x, x′, m, m′ it follows that the sum
vanishes, and from the linear independence of the basis kets |n⟩|n′⟩it follows
that the coeﬃcient of each such ket vanishes. Hence we have
ann′ = −an′n.
(10.11)
In particular ann vanishes so there is zero amplitude to ﬁnd that both
fermions are in the same single-particle state |n⟩. This result is known as
the Pauli exclusion principle.
The Pauli exclusion principle ensures that any expansion of the form
(10.7) involves at least two terms. When there are only two terms, equation
(10.11) ensures that ann′ = −an′n = ±1/√2, so equation (10.7) reduces to
|ψ⟩= ± 1
√2(|n⟩|n′⟩−|n′⟩|n⟩).
(10.12)
In §6.1 we saw when the wavefunction of a pair of particles is a non-trivial sum
over products of wavefunctions for each particle, the particles are correlated.
Hence the Pauli exclusion principle implies that identical fermions are always
correlated.
1 Equation (10.7) implies that we can distinguish the two electrons – electron “1” is
in the state |n⟩, while electron “2” is in state |n′⟩. Physically this is meaningless. What
we are doing is writing down states of distinguishable particles that are consistent with
the restrictions imposed on states of pairs of indistinguishable particles.


10.1 Identical particles
229
10.1.2 Electron pairs
We now specialise to the important case of identical spin-half particles, such
as electrons.
For complete speciﬁcation of the quantum state of a single
electron we must give the values of two functions of x, which can be the
amplitudes ψ±(x) to ﬁnd the electron at x and oriented such that Sz returns
± 1
2. These functions form a two-component wavefunction:
⟨x|ψ⟩≡

ψ+(x)
ψ−(x)

.
(10.13)
Similarly, to specify completely the state of a pair of electrons, four functions
of two locations are required, namely ψmm′(x, x′) for m, m′ = ±. Thus an
electron pair has a four-component wavefunction
⟨x, x′|ψ⟩≡



ψ++(x, x′)
ψ−+(x, x′)
ψ+−(x, x′)
ψ−−(x, x′)


.
(10.14)
We often wish to consider the states of an electron pair in which it is the pair
rather than its individual members that has well-deﬁned spin – in §7.5.1 we
investigated the states of a hydrogen atom in which the atom rather than
its constituent particles has well-deﬁned spin. Our derivation of the results
obtained there relied only on the properties of the spin raising and lowering
operators S±, so they are valid for any pair of spin-half particles, including
an electron pair. Multiplying equation (7.153) through by ⟨m, m′| we see
that when the pair has unit spin and Sz yields 1, the only non-vanishing
amplitude ψmm′ is ψ++. Hence in this state of the pair the wavefunction is
⟨x, x′|ψ, 1, 1⟩= ψ1
1(x, x′)



1
0
0
0


,
(10.15)
where ψ1
1 ≡ψ++ is required by exchange symmetry to be an antisymmetric
function of x and x′:
ψ1
1(x′, x) = −ψ1
1(x, x′).
(10.16)
Similarly, from equation (7.154) it follows that when the pair has s = 1
but m = 0, there are equal amplitudes to ﬁnd the individual spins −+ and
+−, so
⟨x, x′|ψ, 1, 0⟩= ψ0
1(x, x′)



0
1
1
0


,
(10.17)
where ψ0
1(x, x′) ≡ψ−+(x, x′) = ψ+−(x, x′). Swapping the labels x and x′
on both sides of the equivalence and using ﬁrst equation (10.6) and then
equation (10.17), yields
ψ0
1(x′, x) = ψ−+(x′, x) = −ψ+−(x, x′) = −ψ0
1(x, x′).
(10.18)
Thus ψ0
1 like ψ1
1 is an antisymmetric function of its arguments.
Similarly, from equation (7.155) we infer that when the pair has s = 1
and m = −1 its wavefunction is
⟨x, x′|ψ, 1, −1⟩= ψ−1
1 (x, x′)



0
0
0
1


,
(10.19)


230
Chapter 10: Helium and the periodic table
where ψ−1
1
is an antisymmetric function of its arguments.
Finally we must consider the spin-zero state of the pair. By equation
(7.156) it is associated with values of the amplitudes ψ−+ and ψ+−that are
equal in magnitude and opposite in sign. So we can write
⟨x, x′|ψ, 0, 0⟩= ψ0(x, x′)



0
1
−1
0


.
(10.20)
In this case use of the exchange principle yields
ψ0(x, x′) ≡ψ−+(x, x′) = −ψ+−(x′, x) = ψ0(x′, x)
(10.21)
so ψ0, in contrast to the previous functions ψm
1 , is a symmetric function of
its arguments.
The spin-one states of an electron pair are generally called triplet
states while the spin-zero state is called the singlet state. We have seen
that the wavefunction of a triplet state is an antisymmetric function of x
and x′, while wavefunction of the singlet state is a symmetric function of x
and x′. We saw above that electrons that have equal components of angular
momentum parallel to the z axis avoid each other. We now see that this
mutual avoidance is a general characteristic of all the triplet states.
One way of constructing a function of two variables is to take the product
u(x)v(x′) of two functions u and v of one variable. Unless u = v, this product
is neither symmetric nor antisymmetric under interchange of x and x′, so it
cannot be proportional to the wavefunction of either a triplet or a singlet
state. To achieve such proportionality, we must extract the symmetric or
antisymmetric part of the product. That is, for appropriate u and v we may
have
ψm
1 (x, x′) =
1
√2{u(x)v(x′) −u(x′)v(x)}
(m = 1, 0, −1)
ψ0(x, x′) =
1
√2{u(x)v(x′) + u(x′)v(x)}.
(10.22)
In the case u = v, the triplet wavefunctions are identically zero but the sin-
glet wavefunction can be non-vanishing; that is, two distinct single-particle
wavefunctions are required for the construction of a triplet state, while just
one single-particle wavefunction is all that is required for a singlet state.
Wavefunctions of the form (10.22) are widely used in atomic physics
but one should be clear that it is an approximation to assume that a two-
electron wavefunction can be written in terms of just two single-particle
wavefunctions; any wavefunction can be expanded as a sum of products of
single-particle wavefunctions, but the sum will generally contain more than
two terms.
10.2 Gross structure of helium
About a quarter of the ordinary matter in the Universe is in the form of
helium, the second simplest element. The tools that we now have at our
disposal enable us to build a fairly detailed model of these important atoms.
This model will illustrate principles that apply in all many-electron atoms.
We seek the stationary states of the Hamiltonian that describes the
electrostatic interactions between the two electrons and the alpha particle
that make up a helium atom. This Hamiltonian is (cf. eq. 8.1)
H =
p2
n
2mn
+ p2
1
2me
+ p2
2
2me
−
e2
4πǫ0

2
|x1 −xn| +
2
|x2 −xn| −
1
|x1 −x2|

,
(10.23)


10.2 Gross structure of helium
231
where xi and xn are the position operators of the ith electron and the nucleus,
respectively, and pi and pn are the corresponding momentum operators. We
shall work in the atom’s centre-of-mass frame and neglect the small displace-
ment from the origin and kinetic energy that the nucleus has in this frame.
With this approximation, H can be written as the sum of two hydrogenic
Hamiltonians with Z = 2 (cf. eq. 8.10) and the term that describes the
mutual electrostatic repulsion of the electrons
H = HH(p1, x1) + HH(p2, x2) +
e2
4πǫ0|x1 −x2|,
(10.24a)
where
HH(p, x) ≡
p2
2me
−
2e2
4πǫ0|x|.
(10.24b)
We cannot determine the eigenkets of H exactly, so we resort to the approx-
imate methods developed in the previous chapter.
10.2.1 Gross structure from perturbation theory
Our ﬁrst approach is to use the perturbation theory of §9.1. In §8.1 we found
the eigenfunctions of HH. These proved to be products ul
n(r)Ym
l (θ, φ) of the
radial eigenfunctions ul
n derived in §8.1.2 and the spherical harmonics Ym
l
derived in §7.2.3. From the work of §6.1 it follows that the eigenfunctions of
the operator
H0 ≡HH(p1, x1) + HH(p2, x2)
(10.25)
are products
Ψm
nl(x1)Ψm′
n′l′(x2) ≡ul
n(r1)Ym
l (θ1, φ1)ul′
n′(r2)Ym′
l′ (θ2, φ2),
(10.26)
where n and n′ are any positive integers. From equation (8.27) the corre-
sponding eigenvalues are
E0 ≡−4R
 1
n2 + 1
n′2

.
(10.27)
The ground-state wavefunction of H0 will be a product of the ground-state
eigenfunctions (4π)−1/2u0
1(r) of HH, where the function u0
1 is given by equa-
tion (8.36) with Z = 2. From equation (10.27) the ground-state energy of
H0 is
E0 = −8R = −108.8 eV.
(10.28)
The Hamiltonian (10.23) commutes with all spin operators because it
makes no reference to spin. Therefore we are at liberty to seek eigenfunctions
of H that are simultaneously eigenfunctions of the total spin operators S2 and
Sz. We have seen that these eigenfunctions are either singlet or triplet states
and are either symmetric or antisymmetric functions of the spatial variables.
The ground-state wavefunction of H0 is an inherently a symmetric function
of x1 and x2, so the ground-state is a singlet. The ﬁrst-order contribution
to the ground-state energy is the expectation value of the perturbing part of
the Hamiltonian (10.24.) This expectation value is
∆E =
e2
4πǫ0
D0
where
D0 ≡
Z
d3x1 d3x2
|Ψ0
10(x1)|2|Ψ0
10(x2)|2
|x1 −x2|
. (10.29)
Box 10.1 describes the evaluation of the six-dimensional integral D0. We
ﬁnd that ∆E = 5
2R, so our estimate of the ground-state energy of helium is
E = E0 + ∆E = −11
2 R = −74.8 eV. The experimentally measured value is
−79.0 eV.


232
Chapter 10: Helium and the periodic table
Box 10.1:
Evaluating the
integral D0 in equation (10.29)
We express the two position vectors in spherical polar coordinates. Since
x1 is a ﬁxed vector during the integration over x2, we are at liberty
to orient our z axis for the x2 coordinate system parallel to x1. Then
|x1 −x2| =
p
|r2
1 + r2
2 −2r1r2 cos θ2| is independent of φ2.
The mod
square of Ψ0
10 does not depend on φ, so the integrand is independent of
φ2 and we can trivially integrate over φ2. What remains is
D0 = 2
a3
Z
Z
d3x1 |Ψ0
10(x1)|2
Z
dr2dθ2
r2
2 sin θ2e−2r2/aZ
p
|r2
1 + r2
2 −2r1r2 cos θ2|
(1)
where aZ ≡a0/2. Now
sin θ2
p
|r2
1 + r2
2 −2r1r2 cos θ2|
=
1
r1r2
d
dθ2
q
|r2
1 + r2
2 −2r1r2 cos θ2|,
so
Z π
0
sin θ2 dθ2
p
|r2
1 + r2
2 −2r1r2 cos θ2|
= |r1 + r2| −|r1 −r2|
r1r2
=

2/r1
for r1 > r2
2/r2
for r1 < r2.
After using this expression in equation (1), we have to break the integral
over r2 into two parts, and have
D0 = 4
a3
Z
Z
d3x1 |Ψ0
10(x1)|2
Z r1
0
dr2
r2
2
r1
e−2r2/aZ +
Z ∞
r1
dr2 r2e−2r2/aZ

= 2
aZ
Z
d3x1 |Ψ0
10(x1)|2 1
ρ1

2 −e−ρ1(2 + ρ1)
	
,
where ρ1 ≡2r1/aZ. The integral over x1 is relatively straightforward:
given the normalisation of the spherical harmonics, we simply have to
integrate over r1. We transform to the scaled radius ρ1 and ﬁnd
D0 = 1
aZ
Z
dρ1 ρ1e−ρ1 
2 −e−ρ1(2 + ρ1)
	
=
5
8aZ
=
5
4a0
.
10.2.2 Application of the variational principle to helium
We can use the variational principle (§9.2) to reﬁne our estimate of helium’s
ground-state energy. Our estimate is based on the assumption that the elec-
trons’ wavefunctions are those that would be appropriate if the electrons did
not repel one another. Suppose we could somehow switch oﬀthis repulsion
without aﬀecting the attraction between each electron and the alpha particle.
Then the electrons would settle into the wavefunctions we have assumed. If
we then turned the electric repulsion back on, it would push the electrons
apart to some extent, and the atom would become bigger. This thought
experiment suggests that we might be able to obtain a better approximation
to the electrons’ wavefunctions by increasing the characteristic lengthscale
that appears in the exponential of a hydrogenic ground-state wavefunction
(eq. 8.36) from a0 to some value a. The variational principle assures us that
the minimum value with respect to a of the expectation value of H that we
obtain with these wavefunctions will be a better estimate of the ground-state
energy than the estimate we obtained by ﬁrst-order perturbation theory.
Consider, therefore, the expectation value of the Hamiltonian (10.24a)
for the case in which the electronic wavefunction is a product of hydrogenic
wavefunctions with a0 replaced by a. From the work of the last subsection we
already know the value taken when a = a0. Moreover, the expectation value
is made up of ﬁve terms, two kinetic energies, and three potential energies,


10.2 Gross structure of helium
233
and by dimensional analysis it is clear how each term must scale with a: the
kinetic energies scale as a−2 because p is proportional to the gradient of the
wavefunction, which scales like a−1, while the potential energy contributions
scale as a−1 since they explicitly have distances in their denominators. We
know that when a = a0 and the wavefunctions are hydrogenic, the expec-
tation value of the sum of hydrogenic Hamiltonians in equation (10.24a) is
−8R, and we know from the virial theorem (eq. 2.93) that this overall energy
is made up of 8R kinetic energy and −16R of potential energy. We saw above
that when a = a0 the electrostatic repulsion of the electrons contributes 5
2R
of potential energy. Bearing in mind the way that these kinetic and potential
energies scale with a it follows that for general a, the expectation value of
helium’s Hamiltonian is
⟨H⟩a = R{8x2 −(16 −5
2)x}
where
x ≡a0
a .
(10.30)
The derivative of ⟨H⟩a with respect to x vanishes when x = 27
32. When we
insert this value of x into equation (10.30) we ﬁnd our improved estimate of
helium’s ground-state energy is −1
2(3/2)6R = 77.4 eV. As was inevitable,
this value is larger than the experimentally measured value of −79.0 eV. But
it is signiﬁcantly closer than the value we obtained by ﬁrst-order perturbation
theory.
An important indicator of the chemical nature of an element is the
magnitude of the energy required to strip an electron from an atom, which
is called the element’s ionisation energy. In the case of hydrogen, this
energy is simply the binding energy, 13.6 eV. In the case of helium it is the
diﬀerence between the binding energies of the atom and the ion He+ that
remains after one electron is stripped away. Since the He+ ion is hydrogenic
with Z = 2, its binding energy is 4R = 54.4 eV, so the ionisation energy
of helium is 79.0 −54.4 = 24.6 eV. This proves to be the largest ionisation
energy of any atom, which makes helium perhaps the least chemically active
element there is.
10.2.3 Excited states of helium
We now consider the low-lying excited states of helium. Given our success
in calculating the ground-state energy of helium with the aid of hydrogenic
wavefunctions, it is natural to think about the excited states using the same
hydrogenic language. Thus we suppose that the electronic wavefunction is
made up of products of single-particle wavefunctions. We recognise that the
single-particle wavefunctions that should be used in these products will diﬀer
slightly from hydrogenic ones, but we assume that they are similar to the
hydrogenic ones that carry the same orbital angular momentum and have
the same number, n−1, of radial nodes. Hence we can enumerate the single-
particle wavefunctions by assigning the usual quantum numbers n and l to
each electron. We expect to be able to obtain reasonable estimates of the
energies of excited states by taking the expectation value of the Hamiltonian
for hydrogenic states.
In the ﬁrst excited state it is clear that one of the electrons will have been
promoted from its n = 1 ground state to one of the n = 2 states. From our
discussion of shielding in §8.1.3, we expect that the state with l = 0 will have
less energy than any other n = 2 state. Thus we seek to construct the ﬁrst
excited state from a product of the hydrogenic ground-state wavefunction
Ψ1(x) and the wavefunction Ψ2(x) for n = 2, l = 0, which is also spherically
symmetric. Since we are working with distinct single-particle states, we can
construct both singlet and triplet states as described in §10.1.3. The spatial
part of the wavefunction (ψm
1 of ψ0) will be constructed from the product
Ψ1Ψ2 symmetrised as described by equation (10.22). Since the two possible
ways of symmetrising the product diﬀer only in a sign, we defer choosing
between them and make our formulae valid for either case, putting the sign


234
Chapter 10: Helium and the periodic table
for the singlet state on top. We now have to calculate
⟨H⟩= 1
2
Z
d3x d3x′ {Ψ∗
1(x)Ψ∗
2(x′) ± Ψ∗
1(x′)Ψ∗
2(x)}
× H {Ψ1(x)Ψ2(x′) ± Ψ1(x′)Ψ2(x)} .
(10.31)
When we substitute for H from equation (10.24a), integrals over terms such
as Ψ∗
1(x)Ψ∗
2(x′)HHΨ1(x′)Ψ2(x) arise, where HH is the hydrogenic operator
that appears in equations (10.24). The orthogonality of Ψ1 and Ψ2 causes
these integrals to vanish, because HH contains either x or x′, but not both
operators so there is always an integral of the form 0 =
R
d3x Ψ∗
1(x)Ψ2(x).
The integral over Ψ∗
1(x)Ψ∗
2(x′)HHΨ1(x)Ψ2(x′) evaluates to either −4R or
−R depending on whether HH contains x or x′. Hence
⟨H⟩= −5R +
e2
4πǫ0
{D ± E},
(10.32a)
where D and E are, respectively, the direct and exchange integrals:
D ≡
Z
d3x d3x′ |Ψ1(x)Ψ2(x′)|2
|x −x′|
E ≡
Z
d3x d3x′ Ψ∗
1(x)Ψ2(x)Ψ∗
2(x′)Ψ1(x′)
|x −x′|
.
(10.32b)
Since both Ψ1 and Ψ2 are spherically symmetric functions of their arguments,
both integrals can be evaluated by the technique described in Box 10.1. After
a good deal of tedious algebra one discovers that ⟨H⟩= −(56.6 ∓1.2) eV,
where the upper sign is for the singlet state. The experimentally measured
values are −(58.8 ∓0.4) eV. Hence perturbation theory correctly predicts
that the triplet state lies below the singlet state.
The diﬀerences between our perturbative values and the experimental
results arise because the hydrogenic wavefunctions we have employed are not
well suited to helium. The deﬁciency is particularly marked in the case of
the n = 2 wavefunction because the nuclear charge is signiﬁcantly shielded
from the outer electron, so the n = 2 wavefunction should extend to larger
radii than the hydrogenic wavefunction we have employed, which assumes
that the electron sees the full nuclear charge. Consequently, we have over-
estimated the overlap between the two wavefunctions: the extent to which
the wavefunctions permit the electrons to visit the same place. Because our
wavefunctions have unrealistically large overlap, they yield values for both D
and E that are too large. The exchange integral is particularly sensitive to
overestimation of the overlap because it vanishes when there is no overlap,
which D does not. Thus it is entirely understandable that our treatment
yields binding energies that are insuﬃciently negative, and a singlet-triplet
splitting that is too large.
The sensitivity of the singlet-triplet splitting to wavefunction overlap
leaves a clear imprint on the energy-level structure of helium that is shown
in Figure 10.1: the separations of corresponding full (singlet) and dotted
(triplet) lines diminishes as one goes up any column (increasing n) or from
left to right (increasing l). Quantitatively, the singlet-triplet splitting when
the excited electron is in a n = 2, l = 1 state (bottom of second column),
rather than the n = 2, l = 0 state that we have just investigated (bottom of
the ﬁrst column), is 0.2 eV rather than 0.8 eV because, as we saw in §8.1.2,
the l = 1 state has smaller amplitudes at the small radii at which the n = 1
state has large amplitudes.
We have discussed the splitting between singlet and triplet states in the
case in which both the single-particle wavefunctions employed are spherically
symmetric, so the wavefunctions are entirely real. The analysis for wavefunc-
tions that have l̸ = 0 is signiﬁcantly more involved, but the essential result


10.2 Gross structure of helium
235
Figure 10.1 Excited states of helium for n ≤6 and l ≤3. Energies are given with respect
to the ground-state energy, and the line at the top shows the ionisation energy. Full lines
show singlet states and dotted lines show triplet states. Fine structure splits the triplet
states with l ≥1 but the splittings are much too small to show on this scale – the largest
is 0.00012 eV.
is the same because the exchange integral E is always real (Problem 10.3)
and positive. We can see that E is positive as follows. The exchange integral
is dominated by the region x ≃x′ in which the denominator is small. In
this region the numerator does not diﬀer much from |Ψ1(x)Ψ2(x)|2, so it is
positive. Hence E is positive. Thus it is quite generally true that the triplet
states lie below the corresponding singlet state.
In our discussion of spin-orbit coupling in §8.2.1 we saw that the energy
scale of that coupling is ∼1
4Z2α4mec2 (eq. 8.76b). For helium this evaluates
to ∼0.006 eV, which is two orders of magnitude smaller than the singlet-
triplet splitting. Moreover, we found that the coupling vanishes for states
with l = 0, so it should vanish in the ﬁrst excited state of helium.
The
singlet-triplet splitting is large because it has an electrostatic origin, rather
than being a mere relativistic eﬀect: a triplet state has less energy because
in it the electrons are anticorrelated (§10.1.1).
It is commonly stated that on account of this anticorrelation the energy
of electrostatic repulsion between the electrons is smaller in triplet than in
singlet states. This is false: the inter-electron potential energy is larger in
the triplet than the singlet state.2 The reason the triplet has lower energy
is because it places the electrons closer to the nucleus than the singlet does.
Moving the electrons towards the nucleus and thus towards one another nat-
urally increases the energy of electron-electron repulsion, but this increase
is outweighed by the lowering of the negative electron-nucleus energy. The
quantitative results we obtained above should not be used to evaluate the
inter-electron energy because they are based on hydrogenic wavefunctions,
which provide a poor approximation to the true wavefunction. As we saw
in §9.2, even a poor approximation to the wavefunction of a stationary state
yields a useful approximation to the energy of that state because the expec-
tation value of H is stationary in the neighbourhood of a stationary state.
But the expectation value of a single term in H, such as the inter-electron
potential energy, is not extremised by a stationary state, so the error in it
will be of order the error in the wavefunction. In particular, to obtain a value
that is accurate to ﬁrst order in the perturbation, it is mandatory to use a
wavefunction that is correct to ﬁrst order, whereas we used the zeroth-order
wavefunctions. Because the electrons do a better job of keeping out of each
other’s way in the triplet state, in that state they can cohabit in a smaller
volume, where the attraction of the nucleus is stronger. On account of this
2 B. Schiﬀ, H. Lifson, C.L. Pekeris & P. Rabinowitz, Phys. Rev., 140, A1104, (1965)
ﬁnd the inter-electron energy to be 6.80 eV in the singlet state and 7.29 eV in the triplet
state.


236
Chapter 10: Helium and the periodic table
Box 10.2:
Spectroscopic Notation
Standard spectroscopic notation presumes that l and s, the total orbital
and spin angular momenta, are good quantum numbers. The electronic
conﬁguration is a speciﬁcation of the principal (n) and orbital angu-
lar momentum (l) quantum numbers of the individual electrons of the
outermost shell. Within a conﬁguration a spectroscopic term speci-
ﬁes deﬁnite values for the total orbital l and spin s angular momenta of
the outer electrons. Within each term a ﬁne-structure level speciﬁes
a deﬁnite value for the total electronic angular momentum j. Within
a ﬁne-structure level may be distinguished diﬀerent hyperﬁne levels
that diﬀer in total angular momentum f. The letters S, P, D, F denote
l = 0, 1, 2, 3, respectively.
A typical conﬁguration is denoted 2s2p3 meaning one electron has n = 2,
l = 0, and three electrons have n = 2, l = 1.
Terms are denoted by (2s+1)lj; for example 4P1/2 means s = 3
2, l = 1,
j = 1
2.
eﬀect, the true singlet and triplet wavefunctions diﬀer by more than just
a change of sign; in equation (10.31) the functions Ψ1 and Ψ2 should also
change between the singlet and triplet cases.
The singlet–triplet splitting in helium reﬂects destructive interference
between the amplitudes for the two electrons to be simultaneously at the
same place, and it is very much a quantum-mechanical eﬀect.
Through-
out the periodic table, this mechanism gives rise to large energy diﬀerences
between atomic states that diﬀer only in their spin. These diﬀerences make
ferromagnetism possible, and thus provide us with the dynamos, power trans-
formers and electric motors that keep our civilisation on the move.
10.2.4 Electronic conﬁgurations and spectroscopic terms
The ground state of helium has neither spin nor orbital angular momentum.
In conventional spectroscopic notation (Box 10.2) it is designated 1s2, which
implies that it has two electrons in the n = 1 S state. A related notation is
used to indicate the spin, orbital and total angular momentum of the entire
atom. In this system the ground state is designated 1S0. The superscript
1 implies that the state is a spin-singlet because there is zero spin angular
momentum. The S implies that there is no orbital angular momentum, and
the subscript 0 implies that there is zero total angular momentum.
The lowest dotted line in Figure 10.1 represents a triplet of excited
states. These have the electronic conﬁguration 1s2s because there is an
electron in the n = 1, l = 0 state and one in the n = 2, s = 0 state.
They form the spectroscopic term 3S1 because the angular momenta of
the whole atom are given by s = 1, l = 0 and j = 1.
Just above this triplet of states comes the singlet state that has the same
electronic conﬁguration 1s2s but which forms the distinct spectroscopic term
1S0.
Next come four spectroscopic terms that both have the electronic con-
ﬁguration 1s2p: the most energetic of these terms is the singlet 1P1, which is
a set of three quantum states that have exactly the same energy but diﬀer-
ent orientations of the one unit of total angular momentum. Below this are
three terms that have very similar energies: 3P0, 3P1 and 3P2. These terms
diﬀer from one another in the degrees of alignment of the spin and orbital
angular momenta. In the 3P0 term the angular momenta are anti-parallel,
with the result that the atom has zero angular momentum overall, while in
the 3P2 term the angular momenta are parallel, so the atom has two units of
angular momentum. There is just one quantum state in the 3P0 term, and


10.3 Periodic table
237
ﬁve quantum states in the 3P2 term. The small energy diﬀerences between
the 3Pj terms are due to spin-orbit coupling.
Spectrum of helium
The selection rules listed in Table 9.1 include ∆s =
0, so in Figure 10.1 transitions between full and dotted levels are forbidden.
Hence, an atom which is excited into one of the upper triplet states will
cascade down through triplet states until it reaches the 3S1 level at the
bottom of the triplet hierarchy. The states in this level are metastable
because they can decay radiatively only by making the forbidden transition
to the 1S0 ground state, which takes appreciable time. Table 9.1 includes
the rule ∆l = ±1, so transitions are only allowed between states that lie in
adjacent columns, and the excited singlet state that is designated 1S0 is also
metastable.
10.3 The periodic table
The understanding of atomic structure that we have gained in our studies of
hydrogen and helium suﬃces to explain the structure of the periodic table
of the elements.
10.3.1 From lithium to argon
Imagine that we have a helium atom in its ﬁrst excited state and that we
simultaneously add a proton to the nucleus and an electron to the vacancy
with principal quantum number n = 1 that arose when the atom was put
into its excited state. After making these changes we would have a lithium
atom in its ground state. The eﬀects on the outermost electron of adding the
positively charged proton and the negatively charged electron might be ex-
pected to largely cancel, so we would expect the ionisation energy of lithium
to be similar to that of a helium atom that’s in its ﬁrst excited state. This
expectation is borne out by experimental measurements: the ionisation en-
ergy of once excited helium is 4.77 eV while that of lithium in its ground
state is 5.39 eV. Thus the energy required to strip an electron from lithium
is smaller than that required to take an electron from hydrogen or helium
by factors of 2.5 and 4.6, respectively. The comparative ease with which
an electron can be removed from a lithium atom makes compounds such as
LiH stable (Problem 10.5). It also makes lithium is a metal by making it
energetically advantageous for each atom in a lithium crystal to contribute
one electron to a common pool of delocalised electrons.
In their ground states atoms of hydrogen and helium cannot absorb
radiation at optical frequencies because the ﬁrst excited states of these atoms
lie rather far above the ground state (10.2 and 19.8 eV, respectively). The
ﬁrst excited state of lithium is obtained by promoting the n = 2 electron
from l = 0 to l = 1. This change in quantum numbers only increases the
electron’s energy by virtue of shielding (§8.1.3), so the energy diﬀerence is a
mere 1.85 eV, the quantity of energy carried by photons of wavelength 671 nm
that lie towards the red end of the optical spectrum. Elements that lie beyond
helium in the periodic table, the so-called heavy elements, feature very
prominently in astronomical measurements even though they are present in
trace amounts compared to hydrogen and helium because their absorption
spectra contain lines at easily observed optical wavelengths.
There is a useful parallel between a lithium atom and a hydrogen atom
in its ﬁrst excited state: the lithium nucleus, shielded by the two n = 1
electrons, appears to have the same net charge as the proton in hydrogen,
so the n = 2 electron moves in a similar electric ﬁeld to that experienced by
an electron with n = 2 in hydrogen. We can test this parallel quantitatively
by comparing the ionisation energy of lithium (5.39 eV) with the energy of
H with n = 2 (3.40 eV). This agreement is not terribly good because the
n = 2, l = 0 wavefunction that forms the ground state of lithium overlaps


238
Chapter 10: Helium and the periodic table
H
1
1s
1
2
S
1=2
He
2
1s
2
1
S
0
Li
3
2s
1
2
S
1=2
Be
4
2s
2
1
S
0
B
5
2p
1
2
P
1=2
C
6
2p
2
3
P
0
N
7
2p
3
4
S
3=2
O
8
2p
4
3
P
2
F
9
2p
5
2
P
3=2
Ne
10
2p
6
1
S
0
Na
11
3s
1
2
S
1=2
Mg
12
3s
2
1
S
0
Al
13
3p
1
2
P
1=2
Si
14
3p
2
3
P
0
P
15
3p
3
4
S
3=2
S
16
3p
4
3
P
2
Cl
17
3p
5
2
P
3=2
Ar
18
3p
6
1
S
0
K
19
4s
1
2
S
1=2
Ca
20
4s
2
1
S
0
S 
21
3d
1
2
D
3=2
Ti
22
3d
2
3
F
2
V
23
3d
3
4
F
3=2
Cr
24
4s
1
3d
5
7
S
3
Mn
25
3d
5
6
S
5=2
F
e
26
3d
6
5
D
4
Co
27
3d
7
4
F
9=2
Ni
28
3d
8
3
F
4
Cu
29
4s
1
3d
10
2
S
1=2
Zn
30
3d
10
1
S
0
Ga
31
4p
1
2
P
1=2
Ge
32
4p
2
3
P
0
As
33
4p
3
4
S
3=2
Se
34
4p
4
3
P
2
Br
35
4p
5
2
P
3=2
Kr
36
4p
6
1
S
0
Rb
37
5s
1
2
S
1=2
Sr
38
5s
2
1
S
0
Y
39
4d
1
2
D
3=2
Zr
40
4d
2
3
F
2
Nb
41
5s
1
4d
4
6
D
1=2
Mo
42
5s
1
4d
5
7
S
3
T 
43
5s
1
4d
6
6
D
9=2
Ru
44
5s
1
4d
7
5
F
5
Rh
45
5s
1
4d
8
4
F
9=2
Pd
46
5s
0
4d
10
1
S
0
Ag
47
5s
1
4d
10
2
S
1=2
Cd
48
4d
10
1
S
0
In
49
5p
1
2
P
1=2
Sn
50
5p
2
3
P
0
Sb
51
5p
3
4
S
3=2
T
e
52
5p
4
3
P
2
I
53
5p
5
2
P
3=2
Xe
54
5p
6
1
S
0
Figure
9.2
The
rst
v
e
ro
ws
of
the
p
erio
di 
table.


10.3 Periodic table
239
signiﬁcantly with the n = 1 wavefunction, and therefore has exposure to
the full nuclear charge. There is a more satisfying parallel between the ﬁrst
excited state of lithium, in which the n = 2 electron has l = 1 and the
corresponding state of hydrogen: in this state lithium has ionisation energy
3.54 eV.
Consider now the eﬀect of transmuting lithium into beryllium by simul-
taneously increasing the nuclear charge by one unit and adding a second
electron to the n = 2, l = 0 state. The parallel that we have just described
suggests that this operation will be analogous to moving up from hydrogen
to helium, and will signiﬁcantly increase the ionisation energy of the atom.
Experiment bears out this expectation, for the ionisation energy of beryl-
lium is 9.32 eV, 1.7 times that of lithium. As in helium, the ground state
of beryllium has total spin zero, while the ﬁrst excited states have spin one.
However, whereas in the excited states of helium the two electrons have dif-
ferent values of n, in beryllium they both have n = 2, and they diﬀer in their
values of l. Consequently, the overlap between the single-electron states that
form the beryllium triplet is signiﬁcantly larger than the corresponding over-
lap in helium. This fact makes the exchange integral in equations (10.32)
large and causes the singlet excited state to lie 2.5 eV above the triplet of
excited states.
If we add a unit of charge to the nucleus of a beryllium atom, we create
an atom of singly ionised boron. The four electrons with l = 0 that envelop
the ion’s nucleus screen the nuclear charge to a considerable extent from the
perspective of the lowest-energy unﬁlled single-particle state, which is a 2p
state (n = 2, l = 1). The screening is far from complete, however, so the
nuclear charge Z that the outermost electron perceives is greater than unity
and the dynamics of the outermost electron of boron is similar to that of the
electron in a hydrogenic atom with Z > 1. The ionisation energy from the
n = 2 level of hydrogen is 1
4Z2R = 3.40Z2 eV, while that of boron is 8.30 eV,
so Z ∼1.6.
Spin-orbit coupling causes the ground state of boron to form the 2P1/2
term in which the electron’s spin and orbital angular momenta are antipar-
allel. At this early stage in the periodic table, spin-orbit coupling is weak,
so the excited states of the 2P3/2 term lie only 0.0019 eV above the ground
state. C+ ions have the same electronic conﬁguration as boron atoms, and
in interstellar space are more abundant by factors of several thousand. Even
at the low temperatures (∼20 K) that are characteristic of dense interstel-
lar clouds, collisions carry enough energy to lift C+ ions into the low-lying
excited states of the 2P3/2 term, so such collisions are often inelastic, in
contrast to collisions involving the very much more abundant hydrogen and
helium atoms and hydrogen molecules. At the low densities prevalent in in-
terstellar space, an excited C+ ion usually has time to return to the ground
state by emitting a photon before it is involved in another collision. So C+
ions cool the interstellar gas by radiating away its kinetic energy. As a re-
sult of this physics, the temperature of interstellar gas depends sensitively
on the abundances in it of the commonest heavy elements, carbon, nitrogen
and oxygen. The propensity of interstellar gas to collapse gravitationally
into stars depends on the temperature of the gas, so the formation of stars
depends crucially on the existence of low-lying excited states in boron and
the next few elements in the periodic table.
When we add another unit of charge to the nucleus of a boron atom,
the binding energy of the outermost electron increases by a factor of order
(6/5)2 = 1.44. Adding a further electron, which can go into another 2p state
alongside the existing outer electron, oﬀsets this increase in binding energy
to some extent, so we expect the ionisation energy of carbon to lie some-
where between the 8.30 eV of boron and 1.44 times this value, 12.0 eV. The
experimental value is 11.3 eV, which lies at the upper end of our anticipated
range, implying that the mutual repulsion of the two 2p electrons is not very
important energetically. This is to be expected because the ground state of


240
Chapter 10: Helium and the periodic table
carbon belongs to the triplet term3 3P0, so the electrons keep out of each
other’s way. As in boron, the ﬁrst excited states lie very close to the ground
state – they form a 3P1 term 0.0020 eV above the ground state, and there is
a 3P2 term 0.0033 eV above that.
Adding a unit of charge to the nucleus of carbon and then dropping
an electron into another 2p single-particle state creates a nitrogen atom.
The ionisation energy increases (to 14.5 eV) for exactly the same reason that
it did when we transmuted boron into carbon.
The spin of all three 2p
electrons are aligned to ensure that the wavefunction is antisymmetric in the
electrons’ spatial coordinates. Hence the ground state of nitrogen belongs
to a quadruplet of states. The total orbital angular momentum proves to be
zero (Problem 10.7), so all states in this quadruplet have the same energy,
and there are actually four distinct ground states that together comprise the
term 4S3/2 – it is sometimes rather confusingly said that the ground ‘state’
of nitrogen is four-fold degenerate. The lowest excited states form the 2D3/2
term, and they lie 2.3835 eV and 2.3846 eV above the ground state.
Since there are only three single-particle spatial wavefunctions available
with l = 1, namely the wavefunctions for m = ±1, 0, when we add an elec-
tron to nitrogen to form oxygen, the overall wavefunction cannot be totally
antisymmetric in the spatial coordinates of the electrons. The result is that
in oxygen the electrons are less eﬀective in keeping out of each other’s way
than are the electrons in carbon and nitrogen, and the ionisation energy of
oxygen (13.6 eV) is slightly smaller than that of nitrogen. The ground states
form the term 3P2, while states in the 3P1 and 3P0 terms lie 0.020 eV and
0.028 eV above the ground state. In these terms three of the electrons have
cancelling orbital angular momenta as in nitrogen, so the orbital angular
momentum of the atom is just the single unit introduced by the fourth elec-
tron: hence the P in the ground-state term. Spin-orbit interaction causes
the ground state to have the largest available value of j, whereas in carbon
the reverse was the case.
The easiest way to understand ﬂuorine, the element that follows oxygen
in the periodic table, is to skip ahead two places from oxygen to neon, in
which a full house of six electrons is packed into the 2p states. Every spin is
paired and every value of the orbital angular momentum quantum number m
is used twice, so both the spin and the orbital angular momenta sum to zero.
Each of the six 2p electrons is exposed to a large fraction of the ten units
of charge on the nucleus, so the ionisation energy is large, 21.6 eV, second
only to helium of all the elements. There are no low-lying excited states.
This fact together with the large ionisation potential makes neon chemically
inactive.
We transmute neon into ﬂuorine by taking away a unit of nuclear charge
and one of the 2p electrons. The ‘hole’ we have left in the otherwise complete
shell of 2p electrons behaves like a spin-half particle that carries one unit of
orbital angular momentum. Hence the ground state of ﬂuorine has s = 1
2
and l = 1. Spin-orbit interaction causes the 2P3/2 term to lie 0.050 eV below
the 2P1/2 term that also arises when spin-half is combined with one unit of
orbital angular momentum. In the case of oxygen we encountered a similar
maximisation of j, and it turns out that the ground states of atoms with
shells that are more than half full generally maximise j, while j is minimised
in the ground state of an atom with a shell that is less than half full.
We have now reached the end of the ﬁrst long period of the table. The
second long period, from sodium to argon, is an almost perfect copy of the
period we have just covered. Figure 10.3 illustrates this statement by show-
ing the ionisation energies of the elements in the ﬁrst three periods. There
is an abrupt drop in the ionisation energy as we move from neon to sodium,
from an inert noble gas to a highly reactive alkali metal. Then the ionisation
3 See Problem 10.6 for an explanation of why the ground state of carbon has l = 1
rather than l = 0 or l = 2, which are the other possible results of combining two electrons,
each of which has l = 1.


10.3 Periodic table
241
Figure 10.3 Ionisation energies of the ﬁrst nineteen elements.
Figure 10.4 The lowest-lying energy
levels of carbon silicon and germa-
nium. Along this sequence the ﬁne-
structure splitting between the three
lowest-lying levels increases dramat-
ically. In the case of germanium the
spread in the energies of the triplet
states is no longer negligible com-
pared to the energy gap between the
lowest-lying singlet state and the top
triplet state.
energy creeps up as one moves along the period, with two small setbacks, be-
tween magnesium and aluminium, and between phosphorus and sulfur, that
are associated with the start and the half-way point of the 3p, respectively.
10.3.2 The fourth and ﬁfth periods
After reaching argon with its full 3p shell, one might expect to start ﬁlling
the 3d shell. Actually the 4s states prove to be lower-lying because their
vanishing angular momentum allows much greater penetration of the cloud
of negative charge associated with the electrons that have n ≤3. But once
the 4s shell has been ﬁlled, ﬁlling of the 3d shell commences with scandium
and continues unbroken through zinc. Once the 3d shell is full, ﬁlling of the
4p shell commences, ﬁnishing with the noble gas krypton at Z = 39.
In the next period, ﬁlling of the 5s shell takes precedence over ﬁlling of
the 4d shell, and when, after cadmium at Z = 48, the 4d shell is full, ﬁlling
the 5p shell takes precedence over ﬁlling the 4f shell. The last two periods
are very long and have complex patterns due to the availability of shells with
large l that tend to be ﬁlled much later than shells with the same n but small
l.
It is instructive to compare the pattern of energy levels as we move down
one column of the periodic table. Figure 10.4 shows the lowest energy levels
of carbon and the elements, silicon and germanium, that lie beneath it in
the periodic table. As we saw above, carbon has at the bottom of its energy-
level diagram a cluster of three very closely spaced energy levels that form the
terms 3Pj for j = 0, 1, 2. As we proceed through silicon and germanium the
spacing within this cluster grows markedly because it is caused by spin-orbit
coupling, which scales like Z4 (§8.2.1). By the time we reach silicon the
energy diﬀerences created by spin-orbit coupling are no longer very small
compared to the energy diﬀerence between the triplet and singlet states,
which we know is of electrostatic origin. The total electron spin operator
S2 ≡(P
i Si)2 does not commute with the term in the Hamiltonian which is
generated by spin-orbit interaction, which is proportional to P
i Si · Li. So
long as this term is small compared to the terms in the Hamiltonian that do
commute with S2, total electron spin is a good quantum number and it is
meaningful to describe the atom with a spectroscopic term such as 3P0. In


242
Problems
reality the atom’s wavefunction will include contributions from states that
have l̸ = 1, but the coeﬃcients of these terms will be very small, and for most
purposes they can be neglected. As the contribution to the Hamiltonian from
spin-orbit coupling grows, the coeﬃcients in the ground-state wavefunction
of terms with l̸ = 1 grows, and the designation 3P0 becomes misleading. The
lowest-lying three levels of germanium can for most purposes be treated as
3Pj terms. In the case of tin, which lies under germanium, the designation
3Pj is highly questionable, and in lead, which lies under tin, it is valueless.
Problems
10.1
Show that when the state of a pair of photons is expanded as
|ψ⟩=
X
nn′
bnn′|n⟩|n′⟩,
(10.33)
where {|n⟩} is a complete set of single-photon states, the expansion coeﬃ-
cients satisfy bnn′ = bn′n.
10.2
By substituting from equation (10.22) for ψ0 into equation (10.20),
express the singlet state of an electron pair |ψ, 0, 0⟩as a linear combination of
products of the single-particle states |u, ±⟩and |v, ±⟩in which the individual
electrons are in the states associated with spatial amplitudes u(x) and v(x)
with Sz returning ± 1
2. Show that your expression is consistent with the Pauli
condition ann′ = −an′n.
Given the four single-particle states |u, ±⟩and |v, ±⟩, how many linearly
independent entangled states of a pair of particles can be constructed if
the particles are not identical? How many linearly independent states are
possible if the particles are identical fermions? Why are only four of these
states accounted for by the states in ﬁrst excited level of helium?
10.3
Show that the exchange integral deﬁned by equation (10.32b) is real
for any single-particle wavefunctions Ψ1 and Ψ2.
10.4
The H−ion consists of two electrons bound to a proton. Estimate
its ground-state energy by adapting the calculation of helium’s ground-state
energy that uses the variational principle. Show that the analogue for H−of
equation (10.30) is
⟨H⟩a = R(2x2 −11
4 x)
where
x ≡a0
a .
(10.34)
Hence ﬁnd that the binding energy of H−is ∼0.945R. Will H−be a stable
ion?
10.5∗
Assume that a LiH molecule comprises a Li+ ion electrostatically
bound to an H−ion, and that in the molecule’s ground state the kinetic
energies of the ions can be neglected. Let the centres of the two ions be
separated by a distance b and calculate the resulting electrostatic binding
energy under the assumption that they attract like point charges. Given that
the ionisation energy of Li is 0.40R and using the result of Problem 10.4,
show that the molecule has less energy than that of well separated hydrogen
and lithium atoms for b < 4.4a0. Does this calculation suggest that LiH is a
stable molecule? Is it safe to neglect the kinetic energies of the ions within
the molecule?
10.6∗
Two spin-one gyros are a box. Express that states |j, m⟩in which
the box has deﬁnite angular momentum as linear combinations of the states
|1, m⟩|1, m′⟩in which the individual gyros have deﬁnite angular momentum.
Hence show that
|0, 0⟩=
1
√3(|1, −1⟩|1, 1⟩−|1, 0⟩|1, 0⟩+ |1, 1⟩|1, −1⟩)
By considering the symmetries of your expressions, explain why the ground
state of carbon has l = 1 rather than l = 2 or 0. What is the total spin
angular momentum of a C atom?


Problems
243
10.7∗
Suppose we have three spin-one gyros in a box. Express the state
|0, 0⟩of the box in which it has no angular momentum as a linear combination
of the states |1, m⟩|1, m′⟩|1, m′′⟩in which the individual gyros have well-
deﬁned angular momenta. Hint: start with just two gyros in the box, giving
states |j, m⟩of the box, and argue that only for a single value of j will it be
possible to get |0, 0⟩by adding the third gyro; use results from Problem 10.6.
Explain the relevance of your result to the fact that the ground state of
nitrogen has l = 0. Deduce the value of the total electron spin of an N atom.
10.8∗
Consider a system made of three spin-half particles with individual
spin states |±⟩. Write down a linear combination of states such as |+⟩|+⟩|−⟩
(with two spins up and one down) that is symmetric under any exchange of
spin eigenvalues ±. Write down three other totally symmetric states and say
what total spin your states correspond to.
Show that it is not possible to construct a linear combination of products
of |±⟩which is totally antisymmetric.
What consequences do these results have for the structure of atoms such
as nitrogen that have three valence electrons?


11
Adiabatic principle
We often need to understand the quantum mechanics of systems that have
a large number of degrees of freedom. We might. for example, be interested
in the speed at which sound waves propagate through a macroscopic crystal
of diamond. This depends on the deformability of the bonds between the
crystal’s carbon atoms, which is in turn determined by the orbits of the
atoms’ electrons. Also relevant is the inertia of a block of crystal, which
is mostly contributed by the carbon nuclei.
These nuclei are dynamical
systems, in which protons and neutrons move at mildly relativistic speed.
Each proton or neutron is itself a dynamical systems in which three quarks
and some gluons race about relativistically.
When a sound wave passes
through the crystal, each nucleus experiences accelerations that must aﬀect
its internal dynamics, and the dynamics of its constituent quarks. Is there
any chance that a sound wave will induce a nucleus to transition to an excited
state? Could a sound wave cause an atom to become electronically excited?
So long as such transitions are realistic possibilities, it is going to be
extremely diﬃcult to calculate the speed of sound, because the calculation
is going to involve atomic physics, nuclear physics and quantum chromo-
dynamics – the theory strong interactions and quarks, which governs the
internal structure of protons and neutrons. The adiabatic approximation,
which is the subject of this chapter, enables us to infer that such transitions
are exceedingly unlikely to occur. Consequently, in this case and a vast num-
ber of similar situations, the adiabatic approximation greatly simpliﬁes our
problem by permitting us to neglect phenomena, such as electron or nuclear
excitation, that have energy scales that are signiﬁcantly larger than the char-
acteristic energy scale of the phenomenon under investigation, even though
the diﬀerent degrees of freedom are dynamically coupled. Moreover, we shall
see that the adiabatic approximation enables us to calculate quantities such
as the spring constant of the bonds that bind a crystals’s atoms from the
dynamics of the electrons that form these bonds. It also provides the theo-
retical underpinning for the kinetic theory of gases, for most of condensed-
matter physics and much of chemistry. It is enormously important for the
development of quantum ﬁeld theory and our understanding of quantum
chromodynamics. Hence, the adiabatic approximation is an extraordinarily
important tool with applications that span the natural sciences.
We start by deriving the adiabatic approximation. Then we study in
turn elementary applications of it to kinetic theory, to thermodynamics, to
condensed-matter physics, and to chemistry.


11.1 Derivation
245
11.1 Derivation of the adiabatic principle
In §2.2 we stressed that the tdse (2.26) is valid even when H is time-
dependent.
However, we have mostly conﬁned ourselves to Hamiltonians
that are time-independent. In §9.3 we did consider a time-dependent Hamil-
tonian, but we assumed that the time-dependent part of H was small. Now
we consider the case in which H can change by an amount that is large, so
long as the time T over which this change takes place is long in a sense that
will be speciﬁed below.
We consider the dynamics of a system that has a slowly varying Hamil-
tonian H(t). At any instant, H(t) has a complete set of eigenkets |En(t)⟩
and eigenvalues En(t). For the case of vanishing time dependence, equa-
tion (9.43) provides an appropriate trial solution of the tdse (2.26). After
modifying this solution to allow for time-variation of the En, we have
|ψ, t⟩=
X
n
an(t) exp

−i
¯h
Z t
0
dt′ En(t′)

|En(t)⟩.
(11.1)
Since for each t the set {|En(t)⟩} is complete and the numbers an(t) are
arbitrary, no assumption is involved in writing down this expansion of the
system’s ket. When we substitute the expansion (11.1) into the tdse, we
ﬁnd
i¯h∂|ψ⟩
∂t
= H|ψ⟩=
X
n
an exp

−i
¯h
Z t
0
dt′ En(t′)

H(t)|En(t)⟩
=
X
a

{i¯h˙an + anEn(t)}|En(t)⟩+ i¯han
∂|En⟩
∂t

× exp

−i
¯h
Z t
0
dt′ En(t′)

.
(11.2)
Exploiting the fact that |En(t)⟩is an eigenket of H(t) we can cancel a term
from each side and are left with
0 =
X
n

˙an|En(t)⟩+ an
∂|En⟩
∂t

exp

−i
¯h
Z t
0
dt′ En(t′)

.
(11.3)
Now we use the perturbation theory developed in §9.1 to expand |En(t+
δt)⟩as a linear combination of the complete set {|En(t)⟩}. That is, we write
|En(t + δt)⟩−|En(t)⟩=
X
m̸=n
bnm|Em(t)⟩,
(11.4)
where from (9.9) we have
bnm = ⟨Em(t)|δH|En(t)⟩
En(t) −Em(t)
(11.5)
with δH the change in H between t and t + δt. Dividing equation (11.4) by
δt and substituting the result into (11.3) we ﬁnd
0 =
X
n

˙an|En(t)⟩+an
X
m̸=n
⟨Em(t)| ˙H|En(t)⟩
En(t) −Em(t) |Em⟩

exp

−i
¯h
Z t
0
dt′ En(t′)

.
(11.6)


246
Chapter 11: Adiabatic principle
Figure 11.1 A plot of sin(kx) times the slowly varying function 1/(1 + x2). As k →∞
and the wavelength of the oscillations becomes shorter, the negative contribution from
each section of the curve below the x axis more nearly cancels the positive contribution
from the preceding upward section.
When we multiply through by ⟨Ek(t)| this yields
˙ak = −
X
n̸=k
an(t)⟨Ek(t)| ˙H|En(t)⟩
En(t) −Ek(t)
exp

−i
¯h
Z t
0
dt′ {En(t′) −Ek(t′)}

.
(11.7)
Although we have used ﬁrst-order perturbation theory, our working so far
has been exact because we can make δH as small as we please by taking
δt to be small. Now we introduce an approximation by supposing that H
is a slowly varying function of time in the sense that it changes by very
little in the time ¯h/ min(|En −Ek|), which is the time required for signiﬁcant
motion to occur as a result of interference between the stationary states with
energies En and Ek (§3.2). In this approximation, the right side of equation
(11.7) is a product of a slowly varying function of time and an approximately
sinusoidal term that oscillates much more rapidly. When we integrate this
expression to get the change in ak, the integral vanishes rather precisely
because the contributions from adjacent half-periods of the oscillating factor
nearly cancel (Figure 11.1). Hence, if initially ak = 1 for some k, it will
remain unity throughout the evolution. This completes the derivation of the
adiabatic approximation: if a system is initially in the kth state of well-
deﬁned energy, it will stay in this state when the Hamiltonian is changed
suﬃciently slowly.
11.2 Application to kinetic theory
Consider air that is being compressed in the cylinder of a bicycle pump.
The air resists the compression by exerting pressure on the cylinder and
its piston, and it grows hot as we drive the piston in. This phenomenon
is usually explained by treating the air molecules as classical particles that
bounce elastically oﬀthe cylinder walls. In this section we use the adiabatic
principle to interpret the phenomenon at a quantum-mechanical level.
We proceed by ﬁrst imagining that there is only one molecule in the
cylinder, and then making the assumption that when there are a large num-
ber N of molecules present, the pressure is simply N times the pressure we
calculate for the single-particle case. The Hamiltonian that governs our basic
system, a particle in a box, is
H(t) = p2
2m + V (x, t),
(11.8)
where the potential V (x, t) is provided by the walls of the box. The simplest
model is
V (x, t) =

0
for x in the cylinder
∞
for x in a wall or the piston.
(11.9)
The time dependence of V arises because the piston is moving. We need
to ﬁnd the eigenvalues En and eigenkets |En⟩of the Hamiltonian (11.8).


11.2 Kinetic theory
247
We work in the position representation, in which the eigenvalue equation
becomes
−¯h2
2m∇2un + V un = Enun
(11.10)
with un(x) ≡⟨x|En⟩.
From §5.1.1(a) we have that un should vanish on
the walls of the cylinder and the piston.
For x inside the cylinder, the
second term on the left of equation (11.10) vanishes, so En and un(x) are
the solutions to
−¯h2
2m∇2un = Enun
with
un = 0 on the boundary.
(11.11)
We assume that the cylinder’s cross section is rectangular or circular, so
coordinates exist such that (i) the cylinder’s walls are all surfaces on which
one coordinate vanishes and (ii) the Laplacian operator separates. That is,
we can write
∇2 = ∇2
2 + ∂2
∂z2 ,
(11.12)
where ∇2
2 is an operator that depends on the two coordinates, x and y,
that specify location perpendicular to the cylinder’s axis, and z is distance
down that axis.
In this case, we can ﬁnd a complete set of solutions to
equation (11.11) for eigenfunctions that are products un(x) = X(x, y)Z(z)
of a function X of x and y, and a function of z alone. Substituting this
expression for un into equation (11.11) and rearranging, we ﬁnd
Z∇2
2X + 2mEn
¯h2
XZ = −X d2Z
dz2 .
(11.13)
When we divide through by XZ, we ﬁnd that the left side does not depend
on z while the right side does not depend on x or y. It follows that neither
side depends on any of the coordinates. That is, both sides are equal to
some constant, which we may call 2mEz/¯h2. This observation enables us to
separate our original wave equation into two equations
−∇2
2X = 2m(En −Ez)
¯h2
X
−d2Z
dz2 = 2mEz
¯h2
Z.
(11.14)
The physical content of these equations is clear: Ez is the kinetic energy
associated with motion along the cylinder’s axis, so motion perpendicular to
the axis carries the remaining energy, En −Ez. As we push in the piston,
neither the equation governing X and En −Ez nor its boundary conditions
change, so En −Ez is invariant. What does change is the boundary condition
subject to which the equation for Z has to be solved.
We place one end of the cylinder at z = 0 and the piston at z = L.
Then it is easy to see that the required solution for Z is [cf. §5.1.1(a)]
Z(z) ∝sin(kπz/L)
with
k = 1, 2, . . . ,
(11.15)
and the possible values of Ez are
Ez =
h2
8mL2 k2.
(11.16)
The adiabatic principle assures us that if we let the piston out slowly,
the particle’s value of the quantum number k will not change, and its energy
Ez will evolve according to equation (11.16). By conservation of energy, the
energy lost by the particle when L is increased by dL must equal the work
that the particle does on the piston, which is PdV, where P is the pressure


248
Chapter 11: Adiabatic principle
it exerts and dV is the increase in the cylinder’s volume. Let A be the area
of the piston. Then conservation of energy requires that
−dEz = 2Ez
dL
L = PA dL,
(11.17)
from which it follows that
P = 2Ez
AL = 2Ez
V .
(11.18)
When we sum the contributions to the pressure that arise from a large
number, N, of molecules in the cylinder, equation (11.18) yields
P = 2N
V ⟨Ez⟩,
(11.19)
where the angle brackets mean the average over all molecules. At this point
we have to take into account collisions between the N molecules. Colliding
molecules change the directions of their momenta and thus transfer energy
between motion in the z direction and motion in the plane perpendicular to
it. Collisions do not satisfy the adiabatic approximation, so they do change
the quantum numbers of particles. Their overall eﬀect is to ensure that the
velocity distribution remains isotropic even though the piston’s motion is
changing Ez and not the energy of motion in the plane of the piston, En −Ez.
So we may assume that ⟨E⟩= 3 ⟨Ez⟩. Let U ≡N ⟨E⟩be the internal energy
of the gas. Then eliminating ⟨Ez⟩from equation (11.19) in favour of U, we
obtain
PV = 2
3U.
(11.20)
This result is identical with what we obtain by combining the equation of
state of an ideal gas, PV = NkBT , with the expression for the internal
energy of such a gas, U =
3
2NkBT .
Actually our result is more general
than the result for an ideal gas because we have not assumed that the gas
is in thermal equilibrium: the only assumption we have made about the
distribution of kinetic energy among particles is that it is isotropic.
11.3 Application to thermodynamics
In §6.4 we saw that when a system is in thermodynamic equilibrium, we
do not know what quantum state it is in but can assign a probability pi ∝
e−Ei/kBT that it is in its ith stationary state (eq. 6.93a). The energy Ei
of this state depends on the variables, such as volume, electric ﬁeld, shear
stress, etc., that quantify the system’s environment. In the simplest non-
trivial case, that in which the system is a ﬂuid, the only relevant variable is
the volume V and we shall consider only this case. Hence we consider the
energy of each stationary state to be a function Ei(V).
In an adiabatic compression of our system, we slowly change V while
isolating the system from heat sources. From the adiabatic principle it follows
that during such a compression the system remains in whatever stationary
state it was in when the compression started. Consequently, the probabilities
pi of its being in the various stationary states are constant, and the entropy
S = −kB
P
i pi ln pi (eq. 6.91) is constant during an adiabatic change, just
as classical thermodynamics teaches.
During an adiabatic compression, the change in the internal energy U =
P
i piEi is
dU =
X
i
pi
∂Ei
dV = −PdV
where
P ≡−
X
i
pi
∂Ei
∂V .
(11.21)
Since there is no heat ﬂow, the increment in U must equal the work done,
which is the pressure that the system exerts times −dV, so the quantity P
deﬁned by equation (11.21) is indeed the pressure.


11.4 Compressibility of condensed matter
249
11.4 The compressibility of condensed matter
As a second application of the adiabatic principle, we estimate the compress-
ibility of solids and liquids. In condensed matter atoms touch one another
and the volume of the bulk material can be reduced only if every atom is
made smaller. If an atom’s electrons are to be conﬁned to a smaller volume,
by the uncertainty principle, their momenta and therefore their kinetic en-
ergies must increase. We estimate the compressibility of matter by equating
the work done in compressing it to the resulting increase in the energy of
the atom. The adiabatic approximation tells us that during slow compres-
sion, the atom remains in its ground state. Hence the compressibility can be
deduced if we can calculate the ground-state energy E0 as a function of the
atom’s volume V.
Compressibility χ is deﬁned to be the fractional change in volume per
unit applied pressure P:
χ = −1
V
dV
dP .
(11.22)
Conservation of energy implies that −P dV, the work done by the compressor,
is equal to the increase in the ground-state energy dE0, so P = −dE0/dV
and
χ =

V d2E0
dV2
−1
.
(11.23)
E0(V) can be obtained by solving for the atom’s stationary states with the
electronic wavefunction required to vanish on the surface of a sphere of vol-
ume V. A highly simpliﬁed version of such a calculation enables us to obtain
a rough estimate of the compressibility of condensed matter.
We assume that when the atom is conﬁned in a sphere of radius a,
its wavefunction ⟨x|a⟩is the same as the wavefunction for the conﬁning
sphere of radius a0 with all distances rescaled by a/a0 and the appropriate
adjustment in the normalisation. In this case, we can argue as in §9.2 that
the expectation value ⟨a|K|a⟩of the atom’s kinetic energy operator K scales
as (a0/a)2, while the expectation value of the potential-energy operator V
scales as a0/a. Hence
dE0
da = d
da (⟨a|K|a⟩+ ⟨a|V |a⟩) ≃−2⟨a|K|a⟩
a
−⟨a|V |a⟩
a
.
(11.24)
Equation (8.52) states that 2⟨a|K|a⟩= −⟨a|V |a⟩, so the right side of this
equation vanishes.1 Diﬀerentiating again, we ﬁnd
d2E0
da2 ≃6⟨a|K|a⟩
a2
+ 2⟨a|V |a⟩
a2
= −2E0
a2 ,
(11.25)
where equation (8.52) has been used again to simplify the right side. Since
V ∝a3, dV/da = 3V/a and bearing in mind our result that dE0/da = 0 we
ﬁnd
d2E0
dV2 ≃
 a
3V
2 d2E0
da2 = −2
9
E0
V2 .
(11.26)
Using this result in equation (11.23), we conclude that the compressibility is
χ ≃9
2
V
|E0|.
(11.27)
Some care is required in the application of this result to many-electron
atoms. Our assumption that ⟨a|V |a⟩scales as a−1 is valid only if the wave-
function is simultaneously rescaled in the coordinates of all the atom’s elec-
trons. Unfortunately, it is physically obvious that, at least for small fractional
1 Equation (8.52) was actually only derived for hydrogen, but the result applies to the
gross structure of any atom.


250
Chapter 11: Adiabatic principle
changes in volume, only the outermost shell of electrons will be signiﬁcantly
aﬀected by the conﬁning sphere. So realistically we should assume that the
system formed by the inner electron shells remains ﬁxed and the wavefunction
is rescaled in its dependence on the coordinates of electrons in the outermost
shell. In this spirit we shall replace |E0| by N times the atom’s ionisation
energy, where N is the number of electrons in the outermost shell. Since the
electrostatic potential produced by the nucleus and the ﬁxed inner shells of
electrons does not vary with radius as r−1, ⟨a|V |a⟩will not scale as a−1 and
the factor 9
2 in equation (11.27) will be in error. None the less, the equation
should correctly predict the order of magnitude of an atom’s compressibility.
For lithium we take V =
4
3π(2a0)3 and |E0| = 5.39 eV to ﬁnd χ =
2.6×10−11 Pa−1. The measured value varies with temperature and is of order
10−10 Pa−1, which is in excellent agreement with our quantum-mechanical
estimate given the sensitivity of the latter to the adopted value of the rather
ill-deﬁned parameter V.
11.5 Covalent bonding
The air we breathe, the living tissue of our bodies, and the plastics in the
clothes, chairs and carpets that surround us, are held together by covalent
bonds. These are bonds between two atoms of similar electronegativity, such
as two oxygen atoms, two carbon atoms or a carbon atom and an oxygen
atom. In this section we explain how they arise through the sharing by the
atoms of one or more electrons. Unlike the ionic bonds that hold together a
crystal of common salt, which are crudely electrostatic in nature, a covalent
bond is intrinsically quantum-mechanical.
11.5.1 A model of a covalent bond
To show how covalent bonding works, we study a one-dimensional model
that is not at all realistic but it is analytically tractable.2
We imagine a
particle of mass m that moves along the x axis in a potential V (x) that is
made up of two δ-function potentials of the type we introduced in §5.1.1(b).
The wells are separated by distance 2a:
V (x) = −Vδ{δ(x + a) + δ(x −a)}.
(11.28)
We have placed the origin at the midpoint between the two wells, which we
can do without loss of generality. This placement ensures that the Hamil-
tonian commutes with the parity operator, and we can seek solutions of the
tise that have well-deﬁned parity. There are three distinct regions in which
V (x) = 0, namely x < −a, −a < x < a and x > a and in these regions the
wavefunction u(x) must be a linear combination of the exponentials e±kx,
where k is related to E by
k =
√
−2mE /¯h.
(11.29)
With an eye to the construction of solutions of deﬁnite parity we let our
solutions in these regions be
u(x) ∝



ekx
for x < −a,
cosh(kx) or sinh(kx)
for −a < x < a,
e−kx
for x > a,
(11.30)
2 Physicists call a model that lacks realism but nonetheless captures the physical
essence of a phenomenon, a toy model.


11.5 Covalent bonding
251
Figure 11.2 Even- and odd-parity solutions to the two delta-function problem.
Bearing in mind that the wavefunction has to be continuous across the po-
tential wells, we see from Figure 11.2 that solutions of each parity must be
of the form
u+(x) = A ×



ek(x+a)
for x < −a,
cosh(kx)/ cosh(ka)
for −a < x < a,
e−k(x−a)
for x > a,
u−(x) = B ×



−ek(x+a)
for x < −a,
sinh(kx)/ sinh(ka)
for −a < x < a,
e−k(x−a)
for x > a,
(11.31)
where the constants on each segment of the real line have been chosen to
ensure that the wavefunctions equal A and B, respectively, at x = a.
On account of the symmetry of the problem, it suﬃces to choose k for
each parity such that the equation (5.13) is satisﬁed at x = a. From this
equation we have that
2K =

k{1 + tanh(ka)}
for even parity
k{1 + coth(ka)}
for odd parity
(11.32)
where K is deﬁned by equation (5.14). By expressing the hyperbolic func-
tions in terms of eka, we can rearrange the equations into
k
K −1 = ±e−2ka,
(11.33)
where the upper sign is for even parity. In the upper panel of Figure 11.3
the left and right sides of these equations are plotted; the solution k is the
ordinate at which the straight line of the left side intersects with the decaying
exponential plot of the right side.
The value of k+ that we obtain from
the upper curve associated with the even-parity case is always larger than
the value k−obtained for the odd-parity case.
By equation (11.29), the
particle’s binding energy increases with k, so the even-parity state is the
more tightly bound. If we increase a, the exponential curves in the top panel
of Figure 11.3 become more curved and approach the x-axis more rapidly.
Hence k+ diminishes, and k−grows. In the limit a →∞, the exponentials
hug the axes ever more tightly and k+ and k−converge on the point k = K
at which the sloping line crosses the x-axis. This value of k is precisely that
for an isolated well as we would expect, since in the limit a →∞the wells
are isolated from one another. The lower panel of Figure 11.3 shows the
energies associated with k± from equation (11.29).
Suppose our particle is initially in the ground state of two wells that
are distance 2a apart, and imagine slowly moving the two wells towards one
another. By the adiabatic principle, the particle stays in the ground state,


252
Chapter 11: Adiabatic principle
Figure 11.3 Graphical solution of equation (11.33). In the top panel, the exponential is
drawn for the case Ka = 1. Bottom panel: binding energy versus inverse separation. The
scale energy E0 = −¯h2K2/2m is the energy of the bound state of an isolated δ-function
potential well.
which, as we have seen, moves to lower energies. Hence the particle loses
energy. Where does this energy go? It can only go into the mechanism that
positions the wells.
A little thought reveals that if work is done on this
mechanism, it must be resisting the mutual attraction by the holes. Hence
we have arrived at the conclusion that two potential wells that are jointly
binding a particle, can experience a mutual attraction that would not be
present if the bound particle were absent.
11.5.2 Molecular dynamics
The toy model just presented describes an inherently quantum-mechanical
mechanism by which atoms experience mutual attraction or repulsion through
sharing a bound particle. An essentially identical calculation, in which the
energy Ee of the two shared electrons on an H2 molecule is studied as a
function of the separation b of the protons, enables one to understand the
structure of the H2 molecule. Analogously with the toy model, the energy
of the shared electrons decreases monotonically with b, so in the absence of
the mutual electrostatic repulsion of the protons, which had no analogue in
our model, the electrons would draw the protons ever closer together. In
reality there is a particular value b0 of b at which the rate at which Ee(b)
decreases equals the rate at which the electrostatic energy Ep(b) of the pro-
tons increases with decreasing b. The classical intranuclear separation of an
H2 molecule is b0.


11.6 The wkbj approximation
253
A more complete theory is obtained by considering V (b) ≡Ee + Ep to
be a dynamical potential in which the two nuclei move. The analysis of this
problem proceeds in close analogy with our treatment of the hydrogen atom
in §8.1: we introduce a reduced particle and observe that the Hamiltonian
that governs its dynamics commutes with the reduced particle’s angular-
momentum operator; this observation enables us to derive a radial wave
equation for each value of the angular-momentum quantum number l. This
radial wave equation describes oscillations that are governed by the eﬀective
potential V (b). The rotation-vibration spectrum of H2 may be understood
as arising from transitions between states that are characterised by l and the
quantum number n associated with the oscillations in b.
Similar principles clearly apply to studies of the dynamics of many other
molecules: one starts by determining the energy of shared electrons for a
grid of ﬁxed locations of the nuclei. The resulting energies together with
the energy of electrostatic repulsion between the nuclei yields an eﬀective
potential, that can then be used to study the quantum dynamics of the
nuclei. The essential approximation upon which this kind of work depends
is that the frequencies at which the nuclei oscillate are low compared to any
diﬀerence between energy levels of the electronic system, divided by ¯h. Since
electrons are so much lighter than nuclei, this approximation is generally an
excellent one when the molecular rotations and vibrations are not strongly
excited. The approximation is guaranteed to break down during dissociation
of a molecule, however. We return to the toy model to explain why this is
so.
11.5.3 Dissociation of molecules
In the model of §11.5.1, the force provided by the particle that is shared
between the potential wells is not always attractive: if the particle in the
excited, odd-parity bound-state the energy of the particle increases as the
separation of the wells 2a is diminished, so the positioning mechanism must
be pushing the two wells together as it resists the mutual repulsion of the
wells. Consider now a two-well molecule that is held together by the attrac-
tive force provided by the shared particle in its ground state when a photon
promotes the particle to its excited state. Then the force provided by the
particle becomes repulsive, and the wells will begin to move apart. As they
move, much of the energy stored in the excitation of the particle is converted
into kinetic energy of the wells, and soon there is one bare well and one well
with a trapped particle.
As the wells move apart, the energy diﬀerence between the ground and
excited states decreases, while the rate of increase of a increases.
Hence
the adiabatic approximation, which requires that a/˙a ≪(Eo −Ee)/¯h must
break down. In a more complex system, such as a real CO molecule, this
breakdown can cause some of the energy stored in the particle’s excitation
being transferred to excitation of one or both of the ﬁnal atoms rather than
being converted to the kinetic energy of their motion apart.
11.6 The WKBJ approximation
In §5.4 we learnt from a numerical solution of the tise that when a particle
encounters a modest ramp in its potential energy V , the amplitude for re-
ﬂection is small unless the distance over which V changes is small compared
to the particle’s de Broglie wavelength. This result is closely related to the
adiabatic approximation in the sense that in the particle’s rest frame, the
potential that it experiences changes slowly compared to the time taken to
cover a de Broglie wavelength. Now we given an important analytical ar-
gument that leads to the same conclusion and allows us to determine the
evolution of the wave as it moves over the barrier.


254
Chapter 11: Adiabatic principle
The equation we wish to solve is
d2ψ
dx2 = −k2ψ
where
k2(x) ≡2m
¯h2 (E −V ),
(11.34)
and V (x) is some real function. We deﬁne
φ(x) ≡
Z x
dx′ k(x′) =
√
2m
¯h
Z x
dx′ p
E −V (x′),
(11.35)
so k = dφ/dx. Then without loss of generality we write
ψ(x) = S(x)eiφ,
(11.36)
where S is a function to be determined. When we substitute this expression
for ψ into the tise (11.34), cancel the right side with one of the terms on
the left and then divide through by eiφ, we obtain
d2S
dx2 + 2ik dS
dx + iS dk
dx = 0.
(11.37)
Now we reason that when k is a slowly varying function of x, S will be
also. In fact, if k changes on a lengthscale L ≫1/k that is greater than
the wavelength 2π/k, we will have |dk/dx| ∼|k|/L, |dS/dx| ∼|S|/L and
|d2S/dx2| ∼|S|/L2. In these circumstances it follows that the ﬁrst term
in equation (11.37) is negligible compared to the other two, and we may
approximate the equation by
d ln S
dx
= −1
2
d ln k
dx
(11.38)
Integrating both sides from x1 to x2 we ﬁnd that
(S√k)

x1 = (S√k)

x2.
(11.39)
The particle ﬂux implied by ψ(x) is proportional to the probability density
|S|2 times the particle speed k/m. Hence equation (11.39) states that the
particle ﬂux at x1 is equal to that at x2. In other words, when the wavenum-
ber changes very little in a wavelength, the reﬂected amplitude is negligible
and the wavefunction is approximately
ψ(x) ≃constant ×

¯h2
2m(E −V )
1/4
eiφ
(11.40)
where φ(x) is given by equation (11.35).
This solution is known as the
WKBJ approximation.3 The wkbj approximation guarantees conserva-
tion of particle ﬂux in the classical limit of very small de Broglie wavelengths.
It also has innumerable applications outside quantum mechanics, including
the working of ear trumpets, tidal bores and Saturn’s rings.
3 The wkbj approximation is named after Wentzel, Kramers, Brillouin and Jeﬀreys.
This is frequently abbreviated to ‘wkb approximation’.


Problems
255
Problems
11.1
In §9.1 we obtained estimates of the amount by which the energy
of an atom changes when an electric or magnetic ﬁeld is applied. Discuss
whether the derivation of these results implicitly assumed the validity of the
adiabatic principle.
11.2
In §11.2 we assumed that the potential energy of air molecules is
inﬁnitely large inside a bicycle pump’s walls. This cannot be strictly true.
Give a reasoned order-of-magnitude estimate for the potential in the walls,
and consider how valid it is to approximate this by inﬁnity.
11.3
Explain why E/ω is an adiabatic invariant of a simple harmonic os-
cillator, where ω is the oscillator’s angular frequency. Einstein proved this
result in classical physics when he was developing the “old quantum theory”,
which involved quantising adiabatic invariants such as E/ω and angular mo-
mentum. Derive the result for a classical oscillator by adapting the derivation
of the wkbj approximation to the oscillator’s equation of motion ¨x = −ω2x.
11.4
Consider a particle that is trapped in a one-dimensional potential
well V (x).
If the particle is in a suﬃciently highly excited state of this
well, its typical de Broglie wavelength may be suﬃciently smaller than the
characteristic lengthscale of the well for the wkbj approximation to be valid.
Explain why it is plausible that in this case
1
¯h
Z x2
x1
dx′ p
2m{E −V (x′)} = nπ,
(11.41)
where the E −V (xi) = 0 and n is an integer. Relate this condition to the
quantisation rule
H
dx px = nh used in the “old quantum theory”.
11.5
Show that the “old quantum theory” (Problem 11.4) predicts that
the energy levels of the harmonic oscillator are n¯hω rather than (n + 1
2)¯hω.
Comment on the dependence on n of the fractional error in En.
11.6
Suppose the charge carried by a proton gradually decayed from its
current value, e, being at a general time fe. Write down an expression for
the binding energy of a hydrogen atom in terms of f. As α →0 the binding
energy vanishes. Explain physically where the energy required to free the
electron has come from.
When the spring constant of an oscillator is adiabatically weakened by
a factor f 4, the oscillator’s energy reduces by a factor f 2. Where has the
energy gone?
In Problems 3.14 and 3.15 we considered an oscillator in its ground
state when the spring constant was suddenly weakened by a factor f = 1/16.
We found that the energy decreased from 1
2¯hω to 0.2656¯hω not to ¯hω/512.
Explain physically the diﬀerence between the sudden and adiabatic cases.
11.7
Photons are trapped inside a cavity that has perfectly reﬂecting walls
which slowly recede, increasing the cavity’s volume V. Give a physical mo-
tivation for the assumption that each photon’s frequency ν ∝V−1/3. Using
this assumption, show that the energy density of photons u ∝V−4/3 and
hence determine the scaling with V of the pressure exerted by the photons
on the container’s walls.
Black-body radiation comprises an inﬁnite set of thermally excited har-
monic oscillators – each normal mode of a large cavity corresponds to a new
oscillator.
Initially the cavity is ﬁlled with black-body radiation of tem-
perature T0. Show that as the cavity expands, the radiation continues to
be black-body radiation although its temperature falls as V−1/3. Hint: use
equation (6.121).


256
Problems
11.8
Show that when a charged particle gyrates with energy E in a uni-
form magnetic ﬁeld of ﬂux density B, the magnetic moment µ = E/B is
invariant when B is changed slowly. Hint: recall Problem magmomentprob.
By applying the principle that energy must be conserved when the magnetic
ﬁeld is slowly ramped up, deduce whether a plasma of free electrons forms a
para- or dia-magnetic medium.


12
Scattering Theory
In this chapter we study situations in which a free particle approaches a
region of enhanced potential, is deﬂected, and moves away in a new direction.
Diﬀerent potentials lead to diﬀerent probabilities for a particle to be scattered
in a particular direction, so by carefully measuring the outcomes of repeated
scattering experiments, we can infer the potential that was responsible.
In fact, most of what we know about the small-scale structure of matter
has been learnt this way. For example, Rutherford discovered that atoms
have dense, compact nuclei by studying the distribution of α-particles scat-
tered by gold foil, while nowadays we study the sub-atomic structure of mat-
ter by scattering extremely fast-moving electrons or protons oﬀone another
in high-energy accelerators.
The task of scattering theory is to build a bridge between the Hamiltoni-
ans that govern the evolution of states and the quantities – cross sections and
branching ratios – that are actually measured in the laboratory. In §5.3 we
investigated the scattering of particles that are constrained to move in one
dimension, and found that quantum mechanics predicts qualitatively new
scattering phenomena. We expect the freedom to move in three dimensions
rather than one to be fundamental for the physics of scattering, so in this
chapter we investigate three-dimensional scattering. We shall ﬁnd that the
new phenomena we encountered in §5.3 do carry over to physically realistic
situations.
12.1 The scattering operator
Let |ψ⟩be the state of a particle in a scattering experiment. The evolution
of |ψ⟩is governed by the tdse
i¯h ∂
∂t|ψ⟩= H|ψ⟩
⇔
|ψ; t⟩= U(t)|ψ; 0⟩,
(12.1a)
where U(t) = e−iHt/¯h is the time evolution operator introduced in §4.3. We
break the Hamiltonian into a sum H = HK+V of the kinetic-energy operator
HK = p2/2m and the potential V that causes scattering. If |ψ⟩represents a
moving particle – one that approaches or leaves some collision – it must be a
non-trivial superposition of the eigenstates of H – see §2.3.3. Unfortunately,


258
Chapter 12: Scattering Theory
when V̸ = 0 we may not know what these eigenstates are, and it may be
prohibitively diﬃcult to ﬁnd them.
A crucial physical insight allows us to make progress: in a scattering
experiment, long before the particle reaches the interaction region it is ap-
proximately free. The evolution of a free particle |φ⟩is governed by HK
i¯h ∂
∂t|φ⟩= HK|φ⟩
or
|φ; t⟩= UK(t)|φ; 0⟩,
(12.1b)
where UK(t) = e−iHKt/¯h, so the statement that |ψ⟩behaves like a free particle
in the asymptotic past is the requirement that
lim
t→−∞U(t)|ψ; 0⟩=
lim
t→−∞UK(t)|φ; 0⟩
(12.2a)
for some free state |φ⟩. Implicit in this equation is the assumption that the
origin of time is chosen such that the interaction takes place at some ﬁnite
time. For example, it might be in full swing at time t = 0, which we shall
sometimes refer to as ‘the present’.
In the asymptotic future the scattered particle will have moved far away
from the interaction region and will again be approximately free. Hence we
also require
lim
t→+∞U(t)|ψ; 0⟩=
lim
t→+∞UK(t)|φ′; 0⟩
(12.2b)
where |φ′⟩is another free state.
Equations (12.2) allow us to relate the real state |ψ⟩to both |φ⟩and
|φ′⟩at the present time via
|ψ; 0⟩=
lim
t→−∞U †(t)UK(t)|φ; 0⟩=
lim
t′→+∞U †(t′)UK(t′)|φ′; 0⟩
= Ω+|φ; 0⟩= Ω−|φ′; 0⟩,
(12.3)
where the operators Ω± are deﬁned by1
Ω± ≡
lim
t→∓∞U †(t)UK(t).
(12.4)
The origin of the irritating choices of sign in this deﬁnition will be explained
in §12.2 below. In terms of the Ω± operators, the scattering operator S
is deﬁned as
S ≡Ω†
−Ω+.
(12.5)
Here’s what the scattering operator does: ﬁrst, S evolves a free-particle state
back to the distant past, then matches it onto a real state which has the same
past asymptotic behaviour. Next, S evolves this real state forwards – all the
way through the scattering process to the far future. There, the real particle
again behaves like a free particle, and S matches their states before ﬁnally
evolving the free state back to the present. If the real particle is in some
state |ψ⟩, and looks like a free-particle state |φ⟩well before the interaction
occurs, then the amplitude for it will look like some other free state |λ⟩long
after the interaction is ⟨λ|S|φ⟩. Hence the probability to ﬁnd the particle in
the free state |λ⟩is just |⟨λ|S|φ⟩|2. The scattering operator is useful because
it always acts on free states, so if we use it we do not need to know the
eigenstates of the full Hamiltonian H.
Notice that S is deﬁned as a product of four unitary evolution operators
and is therefore itself unitary.
When V = 0, the particle isn’t scattered, and its future state is the
same as its past state. In such circumstances, the scattering operator must
be just the identity operator S = 1, and we can check this is indeed true by
1 It is not self-evident that the limits as t →±∞that appear in equation (12.4) exist.
Appendix K derives a condition on V that ensures that Ω± is well deﬁned.


12.1 The scattering operator
259
putting H = HK in equations (12.3) to (12.5). The operator that describes
a genuine interaction is the transition operator
T ≡S −1
(12.6)
and the probabilities for actual transitions are given by
Prob(|φ⟩→|λ⟩) = |⟨λ|T |φ⟩|2 = |⟨λ|S|φ⟩−⟨λ|φ⟩|2 .
(12.7)
Since S is unitary, we have
1 = S†S = 1 + T † + T + T †T .
(12.8)
Squeezing this equation between ⟨φ| and |φ⟩we obtain
−2ℜe (⟨φ|T |φ⟩) = ⟨φ|T †T |φ⟩.
(12.9)
We also have that
|⟨φ|S|φ⟩|2 = |1 + ⟨φ|T |φ⟩|2 = 1 + 2ℜe(⟨φ|T |φ⟩) + |⟨φ|T |φ⟩|2.
(12.10)
Rearranging and using equation (12.9) yields
1 −|⟨φ|S|φ⟩|2 =
X
|ψi⟩̸=|φ⟩
⟨φ|T †|ψi⟩⟨ψi|T |φ⟩=
X
|ψi⟩̸=|φ⟩
|⟨ψi|T |φ⟩|2 ,
(12.11)
where {|ψi⟩} is a complete set of states that includes |φ⟩. The left side of
equation (12.11) is one, minus the probability that at t = +∞the particle
is still in the state it was in at t = −∞, while the right side is the sum of
the probabilities that the particle has made the transition to some state |ψi⟩
diﬀerent from the original state |φ⟩.
12.1.1 Perturbative treatment of the scattering operator
The deﬁnition S ≡Ω†
−Ω+ is diﬃcult to use in practical calculations, because
the true Hamiltonian H (whose eigenstates we do not know) is buried rather
deep inside. To get at it we ﬁrst diﬀerentiate Ω(t) ≡U †(t)UK(t) with respect
to t, ﬁnding
d
dtΩ(t) = i
¯heiHt/¯h(H −HK)e−iHKt/¯h = i
¯heiHt/¯hV e−iHKt/¯h,
(12.12)
where we have been careful to preserve the order of the operators. We now
re-integrate this equation between t′ and t to reach
Ω(t) = Ω(t′) + i
¯h
Z t
t′ dτ eiHτ/¯hV e−iHKτ/¯h
= Ω(t′) + i
¯h
Z t
t′ dτ U †(τ)V UK(τ).
(12.13)
Taking the Hermitian adjoint of this equation we have
Ω†(t) = Ω†(t′) −i
¯h
Z t
t′ dτ U †
K(τ)V U(τ)
= Ω†(t′) −i
¯h
Z t
t′ dτ U †
K(τ)V UK(τ)Ω†(τ).
(12.14)


260
Chapter 12: Scattering Theory
The integrand itself contains Ω†(τ), but suppose we use this equation to
replace it by Ω(t′) plus an integral that involves Ω†(τ ′), and then repeat this
process once more. The result is
Ω†(t) = Ω†(t′) −i
¯h
Z t
t′dτU †
K(τ)V UK(τ) Ω†(t′)
−1
¯h2
Z t
t′dτ
Z τ
t′dτ ′ U †
K(τ)V UK(τ −τ ′)V UK(τ ′)Ω†(t′)
+ i
¯h3
Z t
t′dτ
Z τ
t′dτ ′
Z τ
t′′dτ ′′ U †
K(τ)V UK(τ −τ ′)V UK(τ ′ −τ ′′)V UK(τ ′′)Ω†(τ ′′).
(12.15)
Through repeated use of equation (12.14) we can push the operator Ω†(τ)
for τ > t′ oﬀinto an integral that contains as many powers of V as we please.
For suﬃciently small V , the magnitude of the term in which Ω(τ) occurs will
be negligible, and we will be able to drop it. Then multiplying the equation
by Ω(t′), and taking the limits t →∞and t′ →−∞, we obtain an expansion
of S in powers of V . Since Ω†(t′)Ω(t′) = 1, this expansion is
S = 1 −i
¯h
Z ∞
−∞
dτ U †
K(τ)V UK(τ)
−1
¯h2
Z ∞
−∞
dτ
Z τ
−∞
dτ ′ U †
K(τ)V UK(τ −τ ′)V UK(τ ′)
+ i
¯h3
Z ∞
−∞
dτ
Z τ
−∞
dτ ′
Z τ ′
−∞
dτ ′′ U †
K(τ)V UK(τ −τ ′)V UK(τ ′ −τ ′′)V UK(τ ′′)
+ · · ·
(12.16)
The virtue of equation (12.16) is that all the evolution operators involve only
the free Hamiltonian HK – information about scattering has been encoded
in the expansion in powers of V .2
Equation (12.16) has an intuitive physical interpretation.
The zeroth-
order term is the identity operator and represents no scattering; its presence
was anticipated by equation (12.6). The term S(1) with one power of V acts
on a free particle as
⟨λ; 0|S(1)|φ; 0⟩= −i
¯h
Z ∞
−∞
dτ⟨λ; 0|U †
K(τ)V UK(τ)|φ; 0⟩
= −i
¯h
Z ∞
−∞
dτ⟨λ; τ|V |φ; τ⟩.
(12.17)
The integrand ⟨λ; τ|V |φ; τ⟩is the amplitude for a particle in the free state |φ⟩
to be deﬂected by the potential V at time τ, transferring it into another free
state |λ⟩. Since we only observe the initial and ﬁnal states, we do not know
when the interaction took place, so we add the amplitudes for the deﬂection
to have occurred at any time. Similarly, the second-order term S(2) gives the
amplitude
⟨λ; 0|S(2)|φ; 0⟩=
 i
¯h
2 Z ∞
−∞
dτ
Z τ
−∞
dτ ′ ⟨λ; τ|V UK(τ −τ ′)V |φ; τ ′⟩
(12.18)
for an incoming particle in the free state |φ⟩to be deﬂected by the potential
at time τ ′, then to propagate freely for a further time τ −τ ′, and ﬁnally
to be deﬂected again by V into the ﬁnal state |λ⟩. Since we do not know
2 This expansion is reminiscent of the perturbation theory developed in §9.1. However,
that theory hinged on the assumption that the response of the system to changes in its
Hamiltonian is analytic in the parameter β. Here we need no such assumption. Instead
we guess that certain integrals become small.


12.2 The S-matrix
261
when either deﬂection occurred, we integrate over all τ and τ ′, subject to
the condition τ ′ < τ that the ﬁrst deﬂection happens earlier. Higher-order
terms describe trajectories that involve larger numbers of deﬂections.
If the potential is suﬃciently weak, we might hope to approximate equa-
tion (12.16) by its lowest-order terms
S ≃1 −i
¯h
Z ∞
−∞
dτ U †
K(τ)V UK(τ).
(12.19)
This drastic curtailing of the series for S is known as the Born approxima-
tion. Whether it is a good approximation in a given physical situation must
be checked, often by estimating the order-of-magnitude of the second-order
term S(2), and checking it is acceptably smaller than the Born term.
12.2 The S-matrix
It is impossible to put any physical particle into a pure energy eigenstate,
because such states are not localised in time. Nonetheless, energy eigenstates
are useful as mathematical tools, being simpler to handle than realistic su-
perpositions. Calculating with energy eigenstates presents special problems
in scattering theory, because the idea that the particle moves towards the
potential is central to our entire formalism, but a particle that is in an energy
eigenstate goes nowhere.
12.2.1 The iǫ prescription
To get to the root of the problem, notice that equation (12.4) implies that
HΩ± = i¯h d
dt

t=0
e−iHt/¯h Ω±
= i¯h d
dt

t=0

lim
τ→∓∞e−iHt/¯hU †(τ)UK(τ)

= i¯h d
dt

t=0

lim
τ→∓∞U †(τ −t)UK(τ −t)UK(t)

= i¯hΩ±
d
dt

t=0
e−iHKt/¯h = Ω±HK.
(12.20)
Therefore, if the interacting state |ψ⟩initially resembles some eigenstate
|E; free⟩of the free Hamiltonian, then equations (12.2a) and (12.20) imply
that
H|ψ⟩= HΩ+|E; free⟩= Ω+HK|E; free⟩= EΩ+|E; free⟩= E|ψ⟩,
(12.21)
so |ψ⟩must actually be an eigenstate |E; true⟩of the true Hamiltonian, with
the same energy E. The trouble with this is that energy eigenstates look the
same at all times, so |E; true⟩and |E; free⟩would always look like each other
– a state of aﬀairs that only makes sense if V = 0 and there is no scattering.
Our argument shows that the initial and ﬁnal states cannot have well-
deﬁned energy – they must be non-trivial superpositions of energy eigen-
states. Nonetheless, because energy eigenstates often simplify otherwise dif-
ﬁcult calculations, we are reluctant to forego them. Instead, we seek a way
to avoid the problem. From equation (12.13), write Ω± in the form
Ω± = 1 + i
¯h
Z ∓∞
0
dτ U †(τ)V UK(τ)
= 1 + i
¯h
Z ∓∞
0
dτ
Z
d3x d3x′ U †(τ)|x⟩⟨x|V |x′⟩⟨x′|UK(τ) .
(12.22)


262
Chapter 12: Scattering Theory
When Ω± is applied to a real scattering state |φ⟩, the integrand vanishes for
large τ, because ⟨x|UK|φ⟩is non-negligible only far from the scattering centre,
where ⟨x|V |x⟩′ ≃0. Hence, if we include a convergence factor e−ǫ|τ|/¯h in the
integrand, for suﬃciently small ǫ > 0 we make a negligible diﬀerence to the
action of Ω± on a real scattering state: for ﬁnite τ this factor approximates
unity to arbitrary accuracy as ǫ →0. Consider therefore the operator eΩthat
has this harmless factor. Taking the limit that the constant ǫ approaches
zero from above we obtain
Ω±|φ⟩−→eΩ±|φ⟩=

1 + lim
ǫ→0+
i
¯h
Z ∓∞
0
dτ U †(τ)V e−ǫ|τ|/¯hUK(τ)

|φ⟩.
(12.23)
The action of eΩ± on a state |φ⟩that is a non-trivial superposition of en-
ergy eigenstates is identical to that of Ω±. However, Problem 12.1 shows that
the product H eΩ± satisﬁes an equation that diﬀers crucially from equation
(12.21):
H eΩ± = eΩ±(HK ± iǫ) ∓iǫ.
(12.24)
Consequently, when we apply H to |ψ⟩≡eΩ±|E; free⟩, where |E; free⟩is an
eigenstate of HK, we ﬁnd
H|ψ⟩= H eΩ±|E; free⟩= (E ± iǫ)|ψ⟩∓iǫ|E; free⟩,
(12.25)
so |ψ⟩is an eigenstate of H only when V = 0 and |ψ⟩= |E; free⟩. Therefore,
when we use eΩ± to generate ‘interacting’ states from eigenstates of HK,
which will henceforth be simply labelled |E⟩, our interacting states are not
stationary states of the true Hamiltonian, and thus can describe scattering.
The crucial point that makes the whole procedure consistent is that for any
physically realistic superposition, it makes no diﬀerence whether we construct
interacting states with Ω± or eΩ±.
We can simplify eΩ± a little: since |τ| = τ for τ ≥0 and |τ| = −τ for
τ < 0, with |φ⟩= |E⟩equation (12.23) becomes
eΩ±|E⟩=

1 + lim
ǫ→0+
i
¯h
Z ∓∞
0
dτ U †(τ)V e−i(E±iǫ)τ/¯h

|E⟩.
(12.26)
Therefore, our modiﬁcation merely supplements the energy eigenvalue E
with a small imaginary piece +iǫ for initial states and −iǫ for ﬁnal states
– the sign on iǫ corresponds to the subscript on Ω± and is historically the
origin of the naming of the Ωoperators. This procedure is known as the
iǫ prescription. In practice the prescription is implemented by using the
original Ω± operators, but pretending that all eigenstates of HK satisfy
HK|E⟩= (E + iǫ)|E⟩
for initial kets when acted on by Ω+
HK|E′⟩= (E′ −iǫ)|E′⟩
for ﬁnal kets when acted on by Ω−.
(12.27a)
Similarly, the Hermitian adjoints of the modiﬁed operators (12.23) imply
that we should likewise pretend that
⟨E|HK = ⟨E|(E −iǫ)
for initial bras when acted on by Ω†
+
⟨E′|HK = ⟨E′|(E′ + iǫ)
for ﬁnal bras when acted on by Ω†
−.
(12.27b)
In no way do we mean that the Hermitian operator HK actually has a com-
plex eigenvalues E; equations (12.27) are merely useful ﬁctions that enable
us to carry out the iǫ prescription.


12.2 The S-matrix
263
12.2.2 Expanding the S-matrix
Since the incoming and outgoing states are free states, and the momentum
operators commute with the free Hamiltonian HK, the scattering operator is
conveniently studied in the momentum representation. We then work with
the S-matrix
S(p, p′) ≡⟨p′|S|p⟩.
(12.28)
where we must use the iǫ prescription of equations (12.27) to interpret the
action of Ω+ on |p⟩that is implicit in this deﬁnition. From equation (12.16),
the lowest-order contribution to the S-matrix is then
⟨p′|S|p⟩≃⟨p′|p⟩−i
¯h
Z ∞
−∞
dτ ⟨p′|eiHKτ/¯hV e−iHKτ/¯h|p⟩
= ⟨p′|p⟩−i
¯h⟨p′|V |p⟩
Z ∞
−∞
dτ e−i(Ep−Ep′)τ/¯h.
(12.29)
Here, we used the rules (12.27) to ﬁnd that the argument of the exponential
in the integrand is actually independent of ǫ. We recognise the integral as
2π¯hδ(Ep −Ep′).
Potentials that depend only on position are diagonal in the x represen-
tation, so the momentum-space elements ⟨p′|V |p⟩are
⟨p′|V |p⟩=
Z
d3x d3x′ ⟨p′|x′⟩⟨x′|V |x⟩⟨x|p⟩
=
1
(2π¯h)3
Z
d3x e−iq·x/¯hV (x)
,
(12.30)
where we have used our expression (2.78) for the wavefunction of a state of
well-deﬁned momentum and deﬁned the momentum transfer
q ≡p′ −p.
(12.31)
Therefore, the Born approximation to the S-matrix just depends on the
Fourier transform of V (x):
⟨p′|S(1)|p⟩= −
2πi
(2π¯h)3 δ(Ep −Ep′)
Z
d3x e−iq·x/¯hV (x).
(12.32)
From the theory of Fourier transforms, we see that potentials which vary
rapidly with x lead to S-matrices that contain signiﬁcant amplitudes for large
momentum transfers. Turning this around, if a particle suﬀers a large change
in momentum when it is scattered by V (x), we infer that V (x) has sharp
features. Arguing along these lines (albeit more classically), Rutherford was
able to deduce the existence of nuclei from the occasional back-scattering
of α-particles oﬀgold foil.
More recently, a team of physicists3 working
at SLAC in Stanford scattered high-energy electrons oﬀprotons; the elec-
trons sometimes suﬀered large-angle scattering, providing evidence for the
existence of quarks inside the nucleons.
The second-order term in the scattering operator can be treated in a
similar manner. From equation (12.16) we ﬁnd
⟨p′|S(2)|p⟩= −1
¯h2
Z ∞
−∞
dτ
Z τ
−∞
dτ ′ ⟨p′|U †
K(τ)V UK(τ −τ ′)V UK(τ ′)|p⟩. (12.33)
The free-evolution operators can be evaluated by inserting the identity op-
erator 1 =
R
d3k |k⟩⟨k| anywhere between the two V operators. Bearing in
3 D.H. Coward, et. al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 20, 292, (1968).


264
Chapter 12: Scattering Theory
mind that HK|p⟩= (Ep + iǫ)|p⟩and ⟨p′|HK = ⟨p′|(Ep′ + iǫ) in accordance
with the iǫ prescription, we ﬁnd
⟨p′|S(2)|p⟩= lim
ǫ→0+ −1
¯h2
Z
d3k

⟨p′|V |k⟩⟨k|V |p⟩
×
Z ∞
−∞
dτ
Z τ
−∞
dτ ′ ei(Ep′+iǫ−Ek)τ/¯he−i(Ep−Ek+iǫ)τ ′/¯h

.
(12.34)
The integral over τ ′ is
Z τ
−∞
dτ ′ e−i(Ep−Ek+iǫ)τ ′/¯h = i¯he−i(Ep−Ek+iǫ)τ/¯h
Ep −Ek + iǫ
,
(12.35)
so the second-order contribution to the S-matrix is
S(2)(p′, p) = lim
ǫ→0+ −i
¯h
Z
d3k ⟨p′|V |k⟩⟨k|V |p⟩
Ep −Ek + iǫ
Z ∞
−∞
dτ e−i(Ep−Ep′)τ/¯h
= −2πi δ(Ep −Ep′) lim
ǫ→0+
Z
d3k ⟨p′|V |k⟩⟨k|V |p⟩
Ep −Ek + iǫ
.
(12.36)
The numerator in the integrand is the amplitude for the particle to scatter
from the |p⟩state into the |k⟩state, and then from the |k⟩state into the |p′⟩
state. The denominator arose from the integration over τ ′, which in turn was
present because the particle travelled freely for some time τ −τ′ in between
the two interactions. Since it comes from this free propagation, the factor
(Ep−Ek+iǫ)−1 is known as the propagator, written here in the momentum
representation. Finally, because we do not measure the intermediate state,
equation (12.36) adds up the amplitudes for scattering via any state.
Higher order terms are handled in a similar way: V occurs n times in
S(n)(p′, p), so there are n −1 intermediate evolution operators, leading to
n−1 propagators. Similarly, there are n−1 sets of intermediate states, all of
which are integrated over. S(n)(p′, p) may be represented diagrammatically
as in Figure 12.1. These Feynman diagrams are an order-by-order book-
keeping system for calculating contributions to the S-matrix: each term in
the series for the S-matrix corresponds to a diagram, and Feynman rules
can be deﬁned that enable the algebraic expression for the term to be inferred
from the diagram. Thus Feynman diagrams summarise complicated integrals
in an intuitive way.
The Feynman rules required here are extremely simple: (i) each vertex
has just two lines going into it and is associated with a factor V ; (ii) each
‘internal line’ (one that has a vertex at each end) is associated with the prop-
agator (Ep −Ek +iǫ)−1, where k, which is integrated over, is the momentum
carried by that line; (iii) there is an overall prefactor −2πiδ(Ep −Ep′), where
p and p′ are the ingoing and outgoing momenta, respectively. With these
rules we can only construct one diagram with a given number n of vertices,
and it’s a simple chain. Feynman diagrams become much more interesting
and valuable when one recognises that when an electron is scattered by an
electrostatic potential V (x), for example, it really collides with a photon, and
one needs to include the coupled dynamics of the photons. In this more so-
phisticated picture, V (x) is replaced by the electromagnetic vector potential
A, which becomes a quantum-mechanical object, and our diagrams include
propagators for both photons and electrons. Moreover, the vertices become
points at which three or more lines meet, two for the incoming and outgoing
electron, and one or more for photons. With a richer set of lines and vertices
on hand, many diﬀerent diagrams can be constructed that all have the same
number of vertices, and therefore contribute to the S-matrix at the same
order.


12.2 The S-matrix
265
Figure 12.1 Feynman diagrams
for the scattering process to lowest
orders in V .
12.2.3 The scattering amplitude
Both the ﬁrst- and second-order approximations to the S-matrix are pro-
portional to an energy-conserving delta function. This result is not limited
to the series expansion for S, but actually holds for the exact S-matrix as
we now demonstrate. Equation (12.20) and its Hermitian adjoint state that
HΩ± = Ω±HK and Ω†
±H = HK Ω†
±. Now S ≡Ω†
−Ω+, so
HKS = HK Ω†
−Ω+ = Ω†
−HΩ+ = Ω†
−Ω+HK = SHK,
(12.37)
that is, [S, HK] = 0. Sandwiching this commutation relation between mo-
mentum eigenstates and using the iǫ prescription of equations (12.27) gives
the relation
0 = ⟨p′|[S, HK]|p⟩= (Ep + iǫ −Ep′ −iǫ)S(p, p′) = (Ep −Ep′)S(p, p′),
(12.38)
so the S-matrix vanishes unless the initial and ﬁnal states have the same
(real) energy.
This tells us that the exact S-matrix must have the form
S(p, p′) ∝δ(Ep −Ep′).
In equation (12.6) we broke S into the sum S = 1 + T to isolate the
scattering amplitude, and it is clear that ⟨p′|T |p⟩is also proportional to
δ(Ep−Ep′).
Motivated by this insight we deﬁne the scattering amplitude
f(p →p′) by
⟨p′|T |p⟩=
i
2π¯hmδ(Ep −Ep′)f(p →p′),
(12.39)
where the factor of i/(2π¯hm) is included for later convenience. On account
of the delta function, f(p →p′) depends on p′ only through its direction ˆp′.
To understand the signiﬁcance of the scattering amplitude, consider the
following argument.
According to the discussion in §12.1, long after the
interaction, a particle that scattered from the free state |φ⟩can be described
by the free state |λ⟩= S|φ⟩. Therefore, in the idealised case that the initial
state was a momentum eigenstate |p⟩, the wavefunction of the ﬁnal state is
⟨r|λ⟩= ⟨r|S|p⟩= ⟨r|p⟩+
Z
d3p′ ⟨r|p′⟩⟨p′|T |p⟩
= ⟨r|p⟩+
i
2π¯hm
Z
d3p′ ⟨r|p′⟩δ(Ep −Ep′)f(p →p′).
(12.40)
Since the states |p′⟩in the integrand are ﬁnal states, the iǫ prescription tells
us to take p′2/2m = (Ep′ −iǫ), so in spherical polar coordinates4
d3p′ = p′2dp′dΩ= m
q
2m(Ep′ −iǫ) dEp′dΩ.
(12.41)
Using this in equation (12.40) and integrating over Ep′ using the delta func-
tion gives
⟨r|λ⟩= ⟨r|p⟩+ i
p
2m(Ep −iǫ)
(2π¯h)5/2
Z
dΩeir√
2m(Ep−iǫ) ˆp′·ˆr/¯hf(p →p′). (12.42)
4 In this chapter it is convenient to deﬁne dΩ= sin θ dθ dφ rather than d2Ω=
sin θ dθ dφ as in earlier chapters.


266
Chapter 12: Scattering Theory
This free-particle wavefunction only looks like the true wavefunction of the
scattered particle long after the collision, so equation (12.42) will only cor-
respond to the physical wavefunction as r →∞. In this limit, the phase of
the exponential in equation (12.42) varies extremely rapidly as a function
of the variables θ and φ that deﬁne the direction of ˆp, over which we are
integrating. The diﬀerent contributions to the integral will therefore cancel
each other out except where the phase of the integrand is stationary with
respect to angle. For suﬃciently large r the sensitivity of the exponential to
angle will exceed that of f(p →p′). Hence the dominant contribution to
the integral arises when
∂
∂θ(ˆp′ · ˆr) = ∂
∂θ cos θ = 0
and
∂
∂φ cos θ = 0,
(12.43)
where we have aligned the polar axis with the (ﬁxed) direction ˆr . These
conditions are satisﬁed when θ = 0, π, independent of φ. When θ = π, and
ˆp′ · ˆr = −1, the integrand of equation (12.42) is exponentially suppressed as
r →∞by the iǫ prescription. Therefore the integral over the unit sphere is
dominated by the contribution from a small disc centred on the direction ˆr.
This insight justiﬁes the approximation
Z
dΩeir√
2m(Ep−iǫ) ˆp′·ˆr/¯hf(p →p′)
≃2πf(p →p′)
Z
d cos θ eir√
2m(Ep−iǫ) cos θ/¯h
≃2π¯h
f(p →p′)
ir
p
2m(Ep −iǫ)
eir√
2m(Ep−iǫ)/¯h.
(12.44)
Using this expression in equation (12.42) we have ﬁnally
lim
r→∞⟨r|φ⟩= lim
r→∞
 
⟨r|p⟩+
1
(2π¯h)3/2
eir√
2m(Ep−iǫ)/¯h
r
f(p →pˆr)
!
= lim
r→∞
1
(2π¯h)3/2

eip·r/¯h + eipr/¯h
r
f(p →pˆr)

,
(12.45)
where in the last line we have taken the limit ǫ →0+. Equation (12.45) shows
that a particle that was initially in a momentum eigenstate will emerge from
the scattering process in a superposition of its original state (no scattering)
and a wave travelling radially outwards. The scattering amplitude f(p →pˆr)
is just the amplitude of this outgoing wave.
In equation (12.45) the time-dependence is suppressed by our convention
that the S-matrix generates the wavefunction at the generic time 0. We now
restore explicit time dependence by introducing a factor e−iEpt/¯h and replace
the incoming state |p⟩by a realistic superposition of such states. Then the
outgoing wavefunction becomes
⟨r|φ; t⟩=
Z d3p φ(p)
(2π¯h)3/2

ei(p·r−Ept)/¯h + ei(pr−Ept)/¯h
r
f(p →pˆr)

,
(12.46)
which is the sum of the incoming wave packet plus a wave packet that travels
radially outwards from the scattering centre.


12.3 Cross-sections & experiments
267
12.3 Cross-sections and scattering experiments
Children sometimes test their skill by taking turns to throw pebbles at a dis-
tant target, perhaps a rock. If a pebble hits, it will bounce oﬀin a diﬀerent
direction, whereas a pebble that misses will simply continue undisturbed.
Each throw will not be repeated exactly, and after a long time we might
imagine that the children have thrown pebbles randomly, such that the dis-
tribution of throws per unit area is uniform over a region surrounding the
target. If so, we can estimate the area of the target that the children see by
simply counting the number of pebbles that hit it – if Nin pebbles are thrown
in per unit area, and Nsc of them hit the rock, the rock has cross-sectional
area
A ≃Nsc/Nin.
(12.47)
With more care, we can measure the angle through which throws are de-
ﬂected. Pebbles that strike nearby points of a smooth rock will bounce oﬀ
in roughly the same direction, whereas a jagged rock may deﬂect pebbles
that hit closely spaced points very diﬀerently. Hence, counting the number
of pebbles that end up going in a given direction gives us information about
the rock’s shape. We deﬁne the diﬀerential cross-section δσ to be the
area of the target that deﬂects pebbles into a small solid angle δΩ. If there
are N(θ, φ)δΩsuch pebbles, then
δσ ≡N(θ, φ)δΩ
Nin
or
δσ
δΩ= N(θ, φ)
Nin
,
(12.48)
and the total cross-section is
σtot ≡
Z
dσ =
Z
dΩdσ
dΩ=
Z
dΩN(θ, φ)
Nin
= Nsc
Nin
(12.49)
as above.
This may seem a rather baroque manner in which to investigate rocks,
but when you go out on a dark night with a torch, you probe objects in a very
similar way by throwing photons at them. A more complete analogy can be
drawn between pebble-throwing children and physicists with particle accel-
erators: a beam containing a large number Nb of particles is ﬁred towards
a target, and detectors measure the number of particles that scatter oﬀinto
each element of solid angle δΩ. Long before the collision, a typical particle
in the beam looks like a free state |φ⟩, so the probability density of each
particle is |⟨x|φ⟩|2 and the number of particles per unit area perpendicular
to the beam direction is
nin(x⊥) = Nb
Z
dx∥|⟨x|φ⟩|2,
(12.50)
where the integral is along the beam direction.
When |φ⟩is expanded in terms of momentum eigenstates, equation
(12.50) becomes
nin(x⊥) =
Nb
(2π¯h)3
Z
dx∥d3p d3p′ei(p−p′)·x/¯hφ(p)φ∗(p′)
=
Nb
(2π¯h)2
Z
d3p d3p′ δ(p∥−p′
∥)ei(p⊥−p′
⊥)·x⊥/¯hφ(p)φ∗(p′),
(12.51)
where the integral over x∥produced the delta function of momentum along
the beam direction.
Experimental beams are highly collimated, so φ(p)
vanishes rapidly unless the momentum is near some average value ¯p.
In
particular, they contain only small amounts of momentum perpendicular to
the beam direction ˆ¯p ≡¯p/|¯p|. Consequently, throughout a region of non-
negligible extent near the centre of the beam, at x⊥= 0, we have eip⊥·x⊥/¯h ≃


268
Chapter 12: Scattering Theory
1. With this approximation, the number of particles incident per unit area
perpendicular to the beam is uniform near the beam centre, so
nin(x⊥) ≃
Nb
(2π¯h)2
Z
d3p d3p′ δ(p∥−p′
∥)φ(p)φ∗(p′).
(12.52)
Equation (12.52) may seem a bizarre way to rewrite the intuitively clear
expression (12.50), but it will soon prove its worth.
We must now calculate N(θ, φ). At large distances, we know that the
wavefunction of particles scattered from the state |φ⟩is ⟨r|T |φ⟩. If we had
placed detectors at some large distance r0 from the scattering centre, over
time they would have detected any particle that has the same values of θ, φ
and is predicted to lie at r > r0. Thus the total number of particles that are
detected in the element of solid angle δΩis
N(θ, φ)δΩ=
Z ∞
r0
dr r2NbδΩ|⟨r|T |φ⟩|2.
(12.53)
Equation (12.46) gives ⟨r|φ⟩= ⟨r|(1 + T )|φ⟩, so
N(θ, φ)δΩ= NbδΩ
Z ∞
r0
dr

Z d3p φ(p)
(2π¯h)3/2 eipr/¯hf(p →pˆr)

2
.
(12.54)
So long as the scattering amplitude is reasonably smooth, the collimation
of the beam allows us to replace f(p →pˆr) by its value at the average
momentum f(¯p →¯pˆr), which gives
N(θ, φ)δΩ= NbδΩ|f(¯p →¯pˆr)|2
Z d3p d3p′
(2π¯h)3 φ(p)φ∗(p′)
Z ∞
r0
dr ei(p−p′)r/¯h.
(12.55)
Explicitly writing the incoming particle’s momentum in terms of the average
momentum ¯p of the beam and its deviation δp from this value, we ﬁnd
p =
p
(¯p + δp) · (¯p + δp) ≃¯p

1 + ¯p · δp
¯p2

= ¯p + ˆ¯p · δp,
(12.56)
so the argument of the exponential in equation (12.55) involves
(p −p′) ≃(δp −δp′) · ˆ¯p = (δp∥−δp′
∥) = (p∥−p′
∥).
(12.57)
Since r > r0 is very large, the phase of this exponential oscillates rapidly, so
again the integral is dominated by contributions for which p∥= p′
∥giving
N(θ, φ)δΩ≃Nb δΩ|f(¯p →¯pˆr)|2
Z d3pd3p′
(2π¯h)2 φ(p)φ∗(p′)δ(p∥−p′
∥)
= nin|f(¯p →¯pˆr)|2δΩ,
(12.58)
where we have used equation (12.52).
Combining this with the deﬁnition (12.48) of the diﬀerential cross-section,
we ﬁnd dσ/dΩfor scattering from momentum p (now relabelled) into a dif-
ferent momentum p′ of the same magnitude:5
dσ
dΩ= |f(p →p′)|2,
(12.59)
where ˆp′ points towards the centre of the element of solid angle dΩ. The
total scattering cross-section is
σtot =
Z
dΩ|f(p →p′)|2.
(12.60)
5 Our language here is loose: neither the incoming nor the outgoing states are strictly
states of well-deﬁned momentum.


12.3 Cross-sections & experiments
269
The two remarkably simple formulae (12.59) and (12.60) form crucial
links between experiment and theory. If the scattering potential is suﬃciently
weak that the Born approximation is valid, equation (12.32) tells us that the
scattering amplitude is f(p →p′) = −4π2¯hm⟨p′|V |p⟩, and the diﬀerential
cross-section is
dσ
dΩ= (4π2¯hm)2|⟨p′|V |p⟩|2 =

m
2π¯h2
Z
d3x e−iq·x/¯hV (x)

2
,
(12.61)
where q = p′ −p.
The integral in equation (12.61) is just the Fourier
transform eV (q) of the potential, so the equation can be rewritten
dσ
dΩ=
m2
4π2¯h4 P(q),
(12.62)
where P(q) = |eV (q)|2 is the power spectrum of V (x). Thus, by measuring
the number of particles that are scattered into a given direction, we can
determine the power spectrum of the interaction potential.
If we could complement this information by measuring the phases of the
Fourier transform, we could reconstruct V (x) from the scattering data. The
obvious way to measure the phases is to observe interference between the
scattered and incident amplitudes – interference of this type is what gener-
ates holograms, from which the three-dimensional structure of the scattering
object can be reconstructed. A high-energy accelerator does not produce
suﬃciently pure quantum states (in the sense of §6.3) for interference be-
tween the incident and scattered amplitudes to be observable. Moreover, in
realistic circumstances, experiments in which this interference was observed
would be of limited interest because in reality the potential V (x) ﬂuctuates
in time. For example, in §12.4 below we discuss scattering of electrons by
atoms, and in this case the electrostatic potential V varies in time as the
electrons that partly generate it whizz about the atom. These internal mo-
tions cause rapid variability in the phases of eV (q), while aﬀecting the power
spectrum of V to a much smaller extent: the latter depends on the number
and structure of the lumps associated with the electrons and nucleus, rather
than on their locations. Thus scattering experiments enable us to unveil as
much of the structure of matter as we are in practice interested in. For this
reason they are one of the most powerful tools we can deploy in our eﬀorts
to understand nature.
12.3.1 The optical theorem
The simple connection between the power spectrum of V (x) and the scatter-
ing cross-section established above relies on the Born approximation. This
approximation is certainly not always valid, so it is interesting to see what
we can say about cross-sections in general.
From equation (12.8) we have that
T + T † = −T †T = −
Z
d3p′′ T †|p′′⟩⟨p′′|T .
(12.63)
Squeezing this equation between ⟨p′| and |p⟩and using equation (12.39), we
ﬁnd that the scattering amplitude f(p →p′) satisﬁes
δ(Ep −Ep′)

f(p →p′) −f ∗(p′ →p)
	
=
i
2π¯hm
Z
d3p′′ δ(Ep′′ −Ep′)f ∗(p′ →p′′) δ(Ep′′ −Ep)f(p →p′′).
(12.64)


270
Chapter 12: Scattering Theory
Figure 12.2 The diﬀerential cross-section for neutron-proton scattering at two values of
the centre-of-mass energy. Data obtained from M. Kreisler et. al., Phys. Rev. Lett., 16,
1217, (1966). The diﬀraction peak at θ = 0 can be understood in terms of the optical
theorem.
The second delta function in the integral ensures that Ep′′ = Ep, so we can
replace the ﬁrst delta function by δ(Ep −Ep′), and then bring it outside the
integral since it no longer depends on p′′. Then we have
f(p →p′)−f ∗(p′ →p) =
i
2π¯hm
Z
d3p′′ δ(Ep′′−Ep)f ∗(p′ →p′′)f(p →p′′).
(12.65)
When p′ = p (equal directions as well as magnitudes), the left side becomes
f(p →p)−f ∗(p →p) = 2iℑmf(p →p) and, after changing variables in the
delta function to obtain δ(Ep′′ −Ep) = (m/p′′) δ(p′′ −p), equation (12.65)
reduces to
ℑmf(p →p) =
1
4π¯h
Z
d3p′′ 1
p′′ δ(p −p′′)f ∗(p →p′′)f(p →p′′)
=
p
4π¯h
Z
dΩ|f(p →p′′)|2.
(12.66)
In this last expression we recognise from equation (12.60) the total cross-
section for scattering from a state of initial momentum p. We have derived
the relation
σtot(p) = 4π¯h
p ℑmf(p →p).
(12.67)
This equation is known as the optical theorem, and relates the total cross-
section to the imaginary part of the scattering amplitude in the forward
direction. It is at heart a re-expression of equation (12.9) with an identity
operator P |ψi⟩⟨ψi| inserted after T † on the right. The forward scattering
gives the probability a particle is removed from the original beam, and this is
associated with the total probability the particle is deﬂected into some other
direction.
When neutrons are scattered from protons, the diﬀerential cross-section
has a peak in the forward direction, as shown in Figure 12.2. As the centre-
of-mass energy is raised, this peak increases in height and decreases in width.
This behaviour is explained by the optical theorem. Experimentally, the total
cross-section becomes roughly constant as p →∞. Equation (12.67) then
implies that ℑmf(p →p) rises roughly in proportion to p, so from equation
(12.59) the diﬀerential cross-section in the forward direction grows at least
as fast as p2. Conversely, since |f(p →p′)|2 is necessarily positive, the total
cross section σtot =
R
dΩ|f(p →p′)|2 is never less than the cross-section
for scattering into any solid angle ∆Ω< 4π. Choosing ∆Ωto be the region


12.4 Scattering electrons oﬀhydrogen
271
around the forward direction in which |f(p →p′)|2 is falling from its peak
at p′ = p, but still greater than 1
2|f(p →p)|2, gives
σtot ≥
Z
∆Ω
dΩ|f(p →p′)|2 ≥1
2∆Ω|f(p →p)|2 ≥1
2∆Ω|ℑmf(p →p)|2.
(12.68)
Hence, from the optical theorem, the fwhm of the peak around the forward
direction is bounded by
∆Ω≤32π2
p2σtot
(12.69)
and therefore shrinks as p−2 as p →∞. This diﬀraction peak is familiar
from optics: collimated light can be diﬀracted by two slits, and the resulting
intensity in the Fraunhofer region is peaked in the forward direction, with a
fwhm that shrinks as the frequency of the light is increased.
12.4 Scattering electrons oﬀhydrogen
We now apply our scattering formalism to a physical problem, namely scat-
tering of electrons by a hydrogen atom that is in its ground state |1, 0, 0⟩
(§8.1). Taking the proton to be a pointlike object at the centre of the atom,
the atom’s charge distribution is
ρ(r) = eδ3(r) −e |⟨r|1, 0, 0⟩|2 .
(12.70)
From §8.1.2 we have that |⟨r|1, 0, 0⟩|2 = e−2r/a0/πa3
0 where a0 is the Bohr
radius (eq. 8.15b). Hence, the atom is the source of an electric ﬁeld E =
−∇Φ, where
Φ(r) =
1
4πǫ0
Z
d3r′
ρ(r′)
|r −r′| =
e
4πǫ0r −
e
4πǫ0πa3
0
Z
d3r′ e−2r′/a0
|r −r′|
=
e
4πǫ0r −
2e
4πa3
0ǫ0
Z
dr′dθ
r′2 sin θ e−2r′/a0
(r2 + r′2 −2rr′ cos θ)1/2 .
(12.71)
The integral diﬀers only trivially from that evaluated in Box 10.1. Adapting
the result obtained there we conclude that
Φ(r) =
e
4πǫ0
1
r + 1
a0

e−2r/a0.
(12.72)
Notice how the ground-state electron shields the pure 1/r Coulomb potential
of the proton, causing the overall potential to decline exponentially at large
distances. This potential will scatter a passing charged particle such as an
electron. It will turn out that our calculations only apply to electrons that
have enough energy to excite or even ionise the atom. Never the less, we
shall consider only the case of elastic scattering, in which the atom remains
throughout in its ground state.
Equation (12.61) gives the Born approximation for the diﬀerential cross
section in terms of the Fourier transform of the interaction potential V (r) =
−eΦ(r). By equation (12.72) V is a function of distance r only, and for any
such function it is straightforward to show that
Z
d3r e−iq·r/¯hV (r) = −4π¯h
q
Z ∞
0
dr r sin
qr
¯h

V (r).
(12.73)
Substituting for V (r) = −eΦ(r) from equation (12.72) we ﬁnd
Z
d3r e−iq·r/¯hV (r) = 4π¯h2
me
8 + (qa0/¯h)2
(4 + (qa0/¯h)2)2 .
(12.74)


272
Chapter 12: Scattering Theory
q
p
p’
θ
Figure 12.3 Trigonometry of the
isosceles triangle tells us the mag-
nitude of momentum transfer, since
|p′| = |p|.
Plugging this result into equation (12.61), we have ﬁnally
dσ
dΩ= 4a2
0
 8 + (qa0/¯h)2
(4 + (qa0/¯h)2)2
2
.
(12.75)
Now q = |p′ −p| = 2p sin(θ/2) (see Figure 12.3), so q is smallest and the
cross-section is greatest for forward scattering (θ = 0). Quantitatively,
dσ
dΩ

θ=0
=
a2
0,
(12.76)
independent of the incoming electron’s energy.
When the electron’s mo-
mentum is large, the cross-section drops sharply as we move away from the
forward direction. This behaviour is in rough agreement with the optical
theorem, although we should not expect equation (12.67) to hold exactly
because we have used the Born approximation.
We now check the validity of the Born approximation. The potential
of equation (12.72) has a characteristic range a0. When an electron with
momentum ∼¯p is aimed at the atom, it is within this range for a time of
order δt ≃a0m/¯p. Averaged over that time, the potential it experiences is
of order
V ≡1
a3
0
Z
dr r2V (r) = −
e2
8πǫ0a0
= −R,
(12.77)
where we have used the deﬁnition (8.15b) of a0 and R is the Rydberg constant
(eq. 8.26). From the tdse the fractional change that V eﬀects in its ket
during this interval is of order δ|ψ⟩/|ψ⟩∼V δt/¯h.
We expect the Born
approximation to be is valid if this fractional change is small, that is, provided
1 ≫a0m
¯p
|V |
¯h =
p
Rme/2
¯p
.
(12.78)
Hence the inequality holds for electrons with energies
¯p2
2me
≫1
4R.
(12.79)
Since R ∼13.6 eV, while the rest-mass energy of the electron is mec2 ∼
511 keV, there is a wide range of energy that is high enough for the Born
approximation to be valid, yet small enough for the electron to be non-
relativistic. In Figure 12.4 we plot the experimentally measured diﬀerential
cross section alongside our estimate (12.75) from the Born approximation
for three electron energies: 4.9, 30 and 680 eV. At the lowest energy the
Born approximation is useless. At 30 eV ∼2R the approximation works
moderately well for back-scattering but seriously underpredicts the cross
section for forward scattering. At 680 eV the approximation works well for
all scattering angles.


12.5 Partial wave expansions
273
Figure 12.4 Elastic e−H scattering at electron kinetic energies E = 4.9, 30 and 680 eV.
The curves show the predictions of the Born approximation (eq. 12.75) while the points
show experimental data from J.F. Williams, J. Phys. B, 8 no. 13 (1975). The accuracy of
the Born approximation increases with energy.
12.5 Partial wave expansions
In §12.2 we introduced the S-matrix by squeezing the scattering operator
between states |p⟩of deﬁnite momentum. This allowed us to evaluate the
action of the free evolution operators UK(τ), because {|p⟩} is a complete set
of eigenstates of HK. In §7.2.5 we saw that states |E, l, m⟩of deﬁnite angular
momentum also form a complete set of eigenstates of HK, so we could just
as well consider the matrix ⟨E′, l′, m′|S|E, l, m⟩.
From equation (12.37) we have that [HK, S] = 0, from which it fol-
lows that ⟨E′, l′, m′|S|E, l, m⟩vanishes unless E′ = E. Also, if the scatter-
ing potential is spherically symmetric, it follows from the work of §4.2 that
[L, S] = 0, so
[Lz, S] = 0
;
[L±, S] = 0
;
[L2, S] = 0.
(12.80)
From the ﬁrst and last of these commutators it follows that ⟨E′, l′, m′|S|E, l, m⟩
vanishes unless m′ = m and l′ = l. Moreover, the second commutator implies
that6
0 = ⟨E, l, m|[S, L+]|E, l, m −1⟩
∝⟨E, l, m|S|E, l, m⟩−⟨E, l, m −1|S|E, l, m −1⟩,
(12.81)
so not only is S diagonal in the |E, l, m⟩basis, but ⟨E, l, m|S|E, l, m⟩is
actually independent of m. We can summarise these constraints on the S-
matrix of a spherically symmetric potential by writing
⟨E′, l′, m′|S|E, l, m⟩= δ(E −E′)δl′lδm′m sl(E),
(12.82)
where sl(E) is a number that depends on E and l. Finally, since the S-matrix
is unitary, sl(E), must have unit modulus, so
⟨E′, l′, m′|S|E, l, m⟩= δ(E −E′)δl′lδm′m e2iδl(E),
(12.83)
where all the remaining information is contained in the real phase shifts
δl(E). This reduction of the whole scattering process to a mere set of phases
makes the angular-momentum basis invaluable for scattering problems.
Equation (12.83) implies that
S|E, l, m⟩= e2iδl(E)|E, l, m⟩,
(12.84)
6 Recall from equations (7.15) that α+(m −1) = α−(m).


274
Chapter 12: Scattering Theory
Box 12.1:
The amplitude ⟨p|E, l, m⟩
We require the amplitude ⟨p|E, l, m⟩that a particle that has well-deﬁned
energy E and angular momentum will be found to have momentum p
and energy p2/2M. Since the quantity we seek is the momentum-space
wavefunction of a particle of well-deﬁned angular momentum, we simply
repeat the work of §7.2.3 in the momentum representation. We have
Lz = 1
¯h(pyx −pxy) = i

py
∂
∂px
−px
∂
∂py

,
where the operators are written in the momentum representation. We
now introduce polar coordinates (p, ϑ, ϕ) for momentum space, and, in
exact analogy to the derivation of equation (7.43), show that Lz = i∂/∂ϕ.
This is simply minus the corresponding real-space result (7.43). It is easy
to see that proceeding in this way we would obtain momentum-space
representations of L± that diﬀer from their real-space analogues (7.52)
only in the substitutions θ →ϑ and φ →ϕ and an overall change of
sign. Consequently the momentum-space wavefunction of a state of well
deﬁned angular momentum must be ψ(p) = g(p)Ym∗
l
(ϑ, ϕ), where g(p)
is as yet undetermined and the complex conjugate spherical harmonic is
required because Lz = +i∂/∂ϕ. If we require E to equal p2/2M, it is
clear that g = Gδ(E −p2/2M). The constant of proportionality, G, is
determined by the normalization condition
δ(E −E′) = ⟨E, l, m|E′, l, lm⟩
= G2
Z
dp p2δ(E −p2/2M)δ(E′ −p2/2M)
Z
dΩ|Ym
l |2
= G2M
Z
dEp
p
2MEpδ(E −Ep)δ(E′ −Ep)
= G2M
√
2ME δ(E −E′) = G2Mpδ(E −E′).
Thus G = (Mp)−1/2.
so if prior to scattering the particle is in the state |E, l, m⟩, it will emerge from
the scattering region in a state that diﬀers only by the acquisition of an extra
phase 2δl(E). This fact mirrors our ﬁnding in §5.3 that a one-dimensional
scattering process is entirely determined by the phase shifts of the even- and
odd-parity solutions to the tise – which are the one-dimensional analogues
of states of well-deﬁned angular momentum.
The above discussion generalises straightforwardly to the case of parti-
cles with non-zero spin, provided we replace the orbital angular momentum
operator L with the total angular momentum operator J, and relabel the
states and phase shifts accordingly. For simplicity, we will conﬁne ourselves
to scalar particles for the rest of this section.
To relate the S-matrix in the form of equation (12.83) to experimental
cross-sections, we must calculate the scattering amplitude f(p →p′). Using
equations (12.6) and (12.83) we obtain
⟨p′|T |p⟩=
X
l′lm′m
Z
dEdE′ ⟨p′|E′, l′, m′⟩⟨E′, l′, m′|T |E, l, m⟩⟨E, l, m|p⟩
=
X
lm
Z
dE ⟨p′|E, l, m⟩⟨E, l, m|p⟩(e2iδl(E) −1).
(12.85)
In Box 12.1 we show that
⟨p|E, l, m⟩= (Mp)−1/2δ(E −Ep)Ym∗
l
(ϑ, ϕ),
(12.86)
where (ϑ, ϕ) are the polar coordinates of p.


12.5 Partial wave expansions
275
If we align the z-axis with the beam direction, the initial state is un-
changed by rotations around the z-axis. Equation (7.38) with α = ˆz then
tells that the initial state has m = 0, so ⟨pˆz|E, l, m⟩vanishes unless m = 0.
Thus for a beam in this direction
⟨E, l, m|p⟩= δ(Ep −E)
√Mp
δm0Y0
l (0).
(12.87)
In §7.2.3 we saw that Y0
l (ϑ) is a real lth-order polynomial in cos ϑ:
Y0
l (ϑ) =
r
2l + 1
4π
Pl(cos ϑ).
(12.88)
We have, moreover, that Pl(1) = 1. Consequently, equation (12.87) yields
⟨E, l, m|p⟩= δ(Ep −E)δm0
s
2l + 1
4πMp.
(12.89)
Using equation (12.86) again to eliminate ⟨p′|E, l, m⟩from equation (12.85),
and then using equation (12.88) to eliminate Y0
l , we obtain
⟨p′|T |p⟩=
X
l
Z
dE ⟨p′|E, l, 0⟩⟨E, l, 0|p⟩
 e2iδl(Ep) −1

=
X
l
2l + 1
4πM
Z
dE
√p′p δ(E −Ep′)δ(Ep −E)Pl(cos ϑ′)
 e2iδl(Ep) −1

=
i
2π¯hM δ(Ep −Ep′)
X
l
2l + 1
2ip ¯hPl(cos ϑ′)
 e2iδl(E) −1

,
(12.90)
where ϑ′ is the angle between p and p′. Comparing this equation with the
deﬁnition (12.39) of the scattering amplitude, we see ﬁnally that
f(p →p′) =
X
l
(2l + 1)Pl(cos ϑ′)fl(Ep),
(12.91a)
where the partial-wave amplitude is deﬁned to be
fl(E) ≡¯he2iδl(E) −1
2ip
= ¯h
p eiδl(E) sin δl(E).
(12.91b)
The diﬀerential cross-section is just the mod square of the scattering
amplitude, and because the spherical harmonics are orthonormal when inte-
grated over all angles, the total cross-section is
σtot =
Z
dΩ|f(p →p′)|2
= 4π
X
l′l
p
(2l′ + 1)(2l + 1)fl′(E)∗fl(E)
Z
dΩY0
l′(ϑ′)Y0
l (ϑ′)
= 4π
X
l
(2l + 1)|fl(E)|2 = 4π¯h2 X
l
2l + 1
p2
sin2 δl(E).
(12.92)
This equation is often written as σtot = P
l σl, where the partial cross-
section of order l,
σl ≡4π(2l + 1)|fl(E)|2 = 4π¯h2 2l + 1
p2
sin2 δl(E),
(12.93)


276
Chapter 12: Scattering Theory
is the cross-section for scattering a particle that has total squared angular
momentum l(l + 1)¯h2. Clearly, the partial cross-sections are restricted by
0 ≤σl ≤4π¯h2 2l + 1
p2
,
(12.94)
with σl only vanishing when the phase shift δl = nπ. Notice from equations
(12.91a) that
ℑmf(p →p) =
X
l
(2l + 1)Pl(1)ℑmfl(E) =
X
l
2l + 1
p
¯h sin2 δl(E). (12.95)
Comparison of this with equation (12.92) shows that the optical theorem
(12.67) is explicitly satisﬁed in this basis. This fact follows from conservation
of angular momentum – we have treated the incoming beam as a superpo-
sition of states of well-deﬁned angular momentum; since the potential is
spherically symmetric, it cannot change the particle’s angular momentum,
so each state of well-deﬁned angular momentum scatters separately, and does
so in conformity with the optical theorem.
In the classical picture of scattering, the angular momentum of a particle
of energy p2/2M is determined by its impact parameter b, which is the
distance between the scattering centre and the straight line tangent to the
incoming trajectory. Quantitatively, the angular momentum has magnitude
L = bp. Large b corresponds to a glancing collision and a small scattering
angle, while at small b the encounter is nearly head-on and the particle is
liable to back-scatter. Thus we expect the diﬀerential cross section fl(p →
p′) to be largest for ϑ′ ≈0 when l is large, and for ϑ′ ≈π to be largest when
l ≈0. The partial cross section σl is expected to decrease as l, and therefore
b, increases.
12.5.1 Scattering at low energy
At low energy, p is small and for l > 0 the classical impact parameter b = L/p
becomes large. Hence we expect low-energy scattering to be dominated by
the partial wave with l = 0.
In this subsection we show that this naive
expectation is borne out by our quantum-mechanical formulae.
To discover how a given particle is actually scattered, we must relate
the phase shifts δl(E) to the scattering potential V (r). Since the free state
|E, l, m⟩is an eigenstate of HK, L2 and Lz, from equation (7.70) it follows
that7
1
r2
∂
∂r

r2 ∂
∂r⟨r|E, l, m⟩

=
l(l + 1)
r2
−2mE
¯h2

⟨r|E, l, m⟩.
(12.96)
When l̸ = 0, the angular momentum term dominates the right side near
the origin, and one can easily show that ⟨r|E, l, m⟩∼rl for small r (Prob-
lem 12.8). Consequently, there is only a very small probability of ﬁnding a
particle that has high angular momentum near the origin. This reasoning
breaks down when the second term on the right side becomes important. For
energy E = p2/2m this occurs at r ≈l¯h/p, which for large l coincides with
the classical impact parameter. Suppose that the scattering potential acts
over some characteristic length R, beyond which it is negligible – for exam-
ple, in the case of the potential (12.72), R is of the order of a few Bohr radii.
If R ≪l¯h/p, then V (r) is only strong in a region where a free wavefunction
would be very small. In this case, the lth partial wave will scarcely be af-
fected, so δl ≃0. Roughly, the only states that suﬀer signiﬁcant scattering
are those with angular momenta in the range l¯h ∼< pR, so for low incoming
7 In fact, ⟨r|E, l, m⟩= jl(kr)Ym
l (θ, φ), where k =
√
2ME/¯h and jl is the lth spherical
Bessel function, but we do not need this result here (see Problem 12.8).


12.5 Partial wave expansions
277
momenta the total scattering amplitude can be well approximated by the
ﬁrst few terms in the inﬁnite sum (12.91a).
In fact, we can see quite generally that only the lowest l states make
signiﬁcant contributions to the low-energy cross-section. The scattering am-
plitude f(p →p′) should be a smooth function of p and p′ as p, p′ →0,
because at low energies the incoming particle has a large wavelength and can-
not resolve any sharp features in the potential. Since in equation (12.91a)
Pl is an lth-order polynomial in cos ϑ = p′ · p/p′p, we see that if f(p →p′)
is to be an analytic function of the Cartesian components of p and p′ at low
energies, the partial wave amplitude fl(E) must vanish with p at least as
fast as
lim
p→0 fl(E) ∼(p′p)l = p2l.
(12.97)
The total cross section (12.92) then behaves as
lim
p→0 σtot = 4π
X
l
a2
l p4l
(12.98)
in terms of some constants al, and can be well approximated by just the
lowest few terms. In the extreme low energy limit, the only non-vanishing
amplitude is f0(Ep →0) = a0 and the diﬀerential cross section
lim
p→0
dσ
dΩ≃a2
0P0 = a2
0
(12.99)
is isotropic.
An eigenstate of the true Hamiltonian H with the same energy and
angular-momentum quantum numbers as |E, l, m⟩has a radial wavefunction
ul(r) that satisﬁes a version of equation (12.96) modiﬁed by the inclusion of
a potential V (r). Writing ul(r) = Ul(r)/r we ﬁnd
d2Ul(r)
dr2
= −2mE
¯h2 Ul(r) + VeﬀUl(r),
(12.100a)
where
Veﬀ(r) ≡2mV (r)
¯h2
+ l(l + 1)
r2
.
(12.100b)
For a general potential, we typically have to solve this equation numeri-
cally, and then ﬁnd the phase shifts by comparing our solution with equation
(12.45) in the large r limit. However, we can obtain a heuristic understanding
of the behaviour of the phase shift as follows. If the potential is attractive
(V (r) < 0), Ul(r) will have a greater curvature, and hence oscillate more
rapidly in the presence of V that it would have done if the particle were free.
A potential with ﬁnite range R ≪l¯h/p only acts over a small part of a radial
oscillation, so when V < 0, the wavefunction emerges from the interaction
region slightly further along its cycle than a free wavefunction. On the other
hand, when the potential is repulsive, Ul(r) has smaller curvature, so oscil-
lates more slowly than a free wavefunction, emerging from the interaction
region slightly behind. Equation (12.84) tells us that states emerge from the
scattering process changed only in phase; we now see that the sign of the
phase shift δl will typically be opposite to that of the potential.
As the magnitude of V increases, so does the diﬀerence in oscillation
rates between interacting and free eigenstates, and hence at ﬁxed energy
|δl(E)| likewise increases. When the potential is suﬃciently strong, the in-
teracting wavefunction can oscillate precisely half a cycle more (or less if
V > 0) in the interaction region than it would do if the state were free, and
then |δl(E)| = π with the consequence that fl(E) →0. In these circum-
stances this angular-momentum state suﬀers no scattering at all.
In §10.3, we saw that atoms of a noble gas such as argon are chemically
inert because in their ground states they have spherically-symmetric distri-
butions of electron charge, and they have no low-lying excited states that


278
Chapter 12: Scattering Theory
Figure 12.5 An exponential attrac-
tive force combined with centrifugal
repulsion generates a minimum in
the eﬀective potential.
can be mixed in by a perturbation to generate a less symmetrical charge dis-
tribution. As a consequence, these atoms generate negligible electric ﬁelds
beyond some limiting radius R ≃a0 that contains nearly all the probability
density of the outermost shell of electrons. At r ≤R there is a signiﬁcant
electric ﬁeld, and any particle that penetrates this region will be appreciably
scattered, but particles that have larger impact parameters will be negligi-
bly scattered. At energies low enough that Rp ≪¯h, scattering from states
with l > 0 is negligible, while the considerations of the previous paragraph
suggest that there could be an energy at which there is also no scattering
from states with l = 0. Then an electron is not scattered at all. Exactly
this Ramsauer–Townsend eﬀect was observed before the development of
quantum mechanics8 when electrons of energy ∼0.7 eV were discovered to
pass undeﬂected past noble-gas atoms.
12.6 Resonant scattering
Nuclear physics involves a combination of short- and long-range forces: the
strong interaction that binds protons and neutrons into nuclei has only a
short range, while the electrostatic repulsion between protons has a long
range. Figure 12.5 illustrates the fact that when a short-range attractive
force is combined with a long-range repulsive force, the overall eﬀective po-
tential Veﬀof equation (12.100b) is likely to have a local minimum. In §5.3.3
we studied scattering by a one-dimensional potential that contained such a
potential well and demonstrated that a plot of the scattering cross-section
versus energy would show sharp peaks at the energies that allow the particle
to be trapped in the well for an extended period of time. The method of
partial waves allows us to consider the physics of temporary entrapment in
the much more realistic case of scattering in three dimensions. We shall ﬁnd
not only that the results of §5.3.3 largely carry over to realistic scattering
potentials, but we are able to extend them to include a quantitative account
of the delay between the particle reaching the potential well and its mak-
ing good its escape. Physicists have learnt much of what is known about
the structure of both nuclei and baryons such as protons and neutrons by
exploiting the connections between bound states and anomalous scattering
cross sections that emerges from this section.
Equation (12.46) gives the wavefunction at late times of a particle that
was initially in the free state |φ⟩. It breaks the wavefunction into two parts.
The ﬁrst is a sum of plane waves φ(p)ei(p·r−Et)/¯h. If |φ(p)|2 has a well-deﬁned
peak at momentum ¯p, from §2.3.3 we know that the amplitude of this ﬁrst
contribution peaks on the plane ˆ¯p · r = ¯pt/m. To determine the location at
8 C. Ramsauer, Ann. Physik, 4, 64 (1921); V.A. Bailey & J.S. Townsend, Phil. Mag.,
42, 873 (1921).


12.6 Resonant scattering
279
which the amplitude of the second part peaks, we observe that as t →∞,
the phase of the exponential in equation (12.46) varies extremely rapidly
as a function of momentum, causing the sign of the integrand to oscillate
quickly. If φ(p) is a smooth function, the integral will be dominated by the
contribution from momenta at which the phase is stationary. To ﬁnd these
points, we must take into account the phase of f(p →pˆr). By equations
(12.91), the scattering amplitude for each partial wave is real except for
a factor eiδl(Ep). Hence the dominant contribution to the second term in
equation (12.46) arises when
∂
∂p {pr −Ept + ¯hδl(Ep)} = 0
i.e. when
r = p
mt −¯h ∂
∂pδl(Ep).
(12.101)
We see that if the phase shift δl(Ep) increases sharply for momenta near the
average momentum of the initial state, the amplitude of the wave will be
concentrated at a smaller radius than the incoming wave would have been.
Consequently, there will be two distinct peaks in the probability of a particle
reaching a detector at some distance from the scattering centre. The ﬁrst
is associated with the possibility that the particle misses its target, and the
second with the possibility that it hits and is temporarily trapped by it
before making good its escape. Thus unstable bound states are associated
with rapid increases with Ep in the phase shift of the scattered particle. This
conclusion mirrors our ﬁnding in §5.3.3 that temporary trapping of particles
by a one-dimensional well is associated with rapid variations with energy in
the phases φ and φ′ of the states of well-deﬁned parity.
We can model a dramatic increase of δl(E) by postulating that, for
energy near some value ER, the phase shift behaves as
δl(E) ≃tan−1
 −Γ/2
E −ER

,
(12.102)
where the ﬁxed energy scale Γ is included to ensure that the argument of the
inverse tangent is dimensionless, and must be positive if we want ∂δl/∂p > 0.
In this model the phase shift rapidly increases by π as the energy increases
through ER. Using the model in equation (12.101), we ﬁnd that the time
delay between the two peaks in the probability density of the particle hitting
a given detector is
∆t = m¯h
p
∂
∂pδl(E) = m¯h
p
∂E
∂p
∂
∂E tan−1
 −Γ/2
E −ER

=
¯hΓ/2
(E −ER)2 + (Γ/2)2 .
(12.103)
We infer from this delay that the lifetime of the quasi-bound state is ≈¯h/Γ in
agreement with the much less rigorous conclusion that we reached in §5.3.3.
Calculating Γ for a physically realistic potential usually requires numer-
ical analysis. However, since the lifetime of the quasi-bound state increases
as Γ decreases, we anticipate that smaller values of Γ correspond to deeper
minima in the potential: a deeper well traps the particle for longer. The
limiting case Γ →0+ implies that the delay in emergence becomes inﬁnite.
We interpret this to mean that the dip in V is just deep enough to genuinely
bind an incoming particle.
If V is so deep that there is a state that has a strictly negative energy,
the ﬁnal state may not resemble the initial free state.
For example, the
incoming particle may get trapped for good in the potential, or it may knock
out another particle that is already trapped (as in ionisation of an atom).
In such cases, the scattering is said to be inelastic and the methods of this
chapter must be extended9.
9 The diﬃculty is not too severe. True bound states have energy E < 0 whereas all
free states must have energy E ≥0. Hence, if |b⟩is bound and |φ⟩is free, ⟨b|φ⟩= 0 so H
acts on a larger Hilbert space than does HK. Including these extra states carefully allows
us to treat bound states. (See also Problem 12.6.)


280
Chapter 12: Scattering Theory
Returning to the case Γ > 0, we now investigate how the cross-section is
aﬀected by the delayed emergence of our particle. From equations (12.6) and
(12.46) the wavefunction of the scattered particle in the asymptotic future is
⟨r|T |φ; t⟩=
Z
d3p
(2π¯h)3/2 φ(p)ei(pr−Et)/¯h
r
f(p →pˆr)
=
X
l
(2l + 1)
Z
d3p
(2π¯h)3/2 φ(p)ei(pr−Et)/¯h
r
Pl(ˆp · ˆr)fl(E),
(12.104)
where the second line uses equation (12.91a) to relate f(p →p′) to the
partial-wave amplitudes fl(E). To derive the cross-section (12.59), we as-
sumed that the scattering amplitudes are more slowly varying functions of
p than the wavepacket φ(p) – see the discussion after equation (12.54). In
the presence of a resonance, this approximation may break down. Indeed,
when one of the phase shifts δl(E) has the form of equation (12.102), from
equation (12.91b) the corresponding partial wave amplitude is
fl(E) ≡¯h
p eiδl(E) sin δl(E) = −¯h
p
Γ/2
E −ER + iΓ/2,
(12.105)
and for small Γ this varies rapidly when E ≈ER.
We assume that the
incoming wavepacket φ(p) contains states |p⟩that are restricted in energy to
a range of width ∆and consider ﬁrst the case ∆≪Γ in which the resonance
is broader than the uncertainty in the energy of the incoming particle.
12.6.1 Breit–Wigner resonances
If ∆≪Γ, then fl(E) varies slowly with energy in comparison to φ(p),
and equation (12.93) for the partial cross-sections σl applies. Again using
equation (12.102), we have (cf. eq. 5.64a)
σl(E) = 4π(2l + 1)|fl|2 ≃4π¯h2
p2
(2l + 1)(Γ/2)2
(E −ER)2 + (Γ/2)2 .
(12.106)
A peak in the cross-section that follows this famous formula is said arise
from a pure Breit–Wigner resonance. Breit–Wigner resonances are eas-
ily detected in plots of a cross-section versus energy and are the experimental
signature of quasi-bound states in the scattering potential. Figure 12.6 is a
plot of equation (12.106). Notice that the energy dependence is a combi-
nation of the slow decline with E associated with the factor p−2 and the
peak that arises from the Lorentzian ﬁnal factor – such factors are familiar
from the theory of a damped harmonic oscillator (Box 5.1). If Γ ≪ER,
the factor p−2 changes very little over the width of the bump, and the res-
onance curve falls to half its maximum height when E ≃ER ± Γ/2. Thus
the resonance lifetime ¯h/Γ can be determined from the fwhm of the peak
in the cross-section. This result explains why we needed to restrict ourselves
to superpositions with ∆≪Γ: in order to resolve the Breit–Wigner curve
experimentally, there had better be a good chance that our particle’s energy
lies within Γ of ER, where all the action lies.
12.6.2 Radioactive decay
The width Γ of a very long-lived resonance may be so small that our experi-
mental apparatus cannot generate incoming particles with suﬃciently small
uncertainty ∆in the energy to resolve the curve of Figure 12.6. Then, using
equation (12.86), we expand the momentum amplitudes φ(p) of the initial


12.6 Resonant scattering
281
Figure 12.6 The Breit–Wigner formula for a scattering cross section in the presence of a
resonance. Here ER = 10Γ and the cross section is normalised by s ≡2(2l + 1)¯h2/mΓ.
state as
φ(p) =
X
lm
Z
dE′ ⟨p|E′, l, m⟩⟨E′, l, m|φ⟩
=
X
lm
Ym∗
l
(ˆp)⟨E, l, m|φ⟩
√Mp
,
where
E ≡p2
2M .
(12.107)
Suppose for simplicity that, near some energy ER, only one partial wave
amplitude has the form of equation (12.105), the others all being negligi-
ble by comparison. Then, ignoring any angular dependence, the ﬁnal-state
wavefunction (12.104) of the scattered particle contains a factor
⟨r|T |φ; t⟩∝
Z
dp
p2
(2π¯h)3/2
⟨E, l, m|φ⟩
(Mp)1/2
Γ¯h
2pr
ei(pr−Et)/¯h
E −ER + iΓ/2
= Γ¯h
2r
Z ∞
0
dE
(2π¯h)3/2
s
M
p ⟨E, l, m|φ⟩
ei(pr−Et)/¯h
E −ER + iΓ/2.
(12.108)
If the initial state |φ⟩has average energy around ⟨HK⟩≃ER, but is a super-
position of states with diﬀerent energies, smooth over a range ∆≫Γ, we may
approximate p−1/2⟨E, l, m|φ⟩by its value at resonance, p−1/2
R
⟨ER, l, m|φ⟩and
bring it outside the integral. Similarly, near resonance we approximate p by
p ≃pR + dp
dE (E −ER) = pR + E −ER
vR
,
(12.109)
where vR = pR/M, so
ei(pr−Et)/¯h ≃ei(pRr−ERt)/¯hei(E−ER)(r/vR−t)/¯h.
(12.110)
Substituting these approximations into equation (12.108), we ﬁnd
⟨r|T |φ; t⟩∼
Γ¯h
2v1/2
R
⟨ER, l, m|φ⟩
(2π¯h)3/2
ei(pRr−ERt)/¯h
r
Z ∞
0
dE ei(E−ER)(r/vR−t)/¯h
E −ER + iΓ/2
.
(12.111)
The remaining integral can be done by contour integration. Since the denom-
inator is large except near E = ER, we can extend the range of integration
to −∞< E < ∞, without drastically aﬀecting the integral. If r > vRt, we
close the contour in the upper half complex E plane. Since the only pole is
in the lower half-plane, the integral evaluates to zero. If r < vRt, we close


282
Problems
the contour in the lower half-plane. Evaluating the residue of the pole at
E = ER −iΓ/2, we conclude that
⟨r|T |φ; t⟩∼
iΓ
2(2π¯hvR)1/2 ⟨ER, l, m|φ⟩ei(pRr−ERt)/¯h
r
e−Γ(t−r/vR)/2¯h. (12.112)
Consequently,
|⟨r|T |φ; t⟩|2 ∼



0
if r > vRt
Γ2
8π¯hvR
|⟨ER, l, m|φ⟩|2
r2
e−Γ(t−r/vR)/¯h
otherwise.
(12.113)
The physical interpretation of this equation is the following. The probability
density |⟨r|T |φ; t⟩|2 is zero before time t′ = r/vR because the particle travels
radially outwards at speed ≃vR. Subsequently, the probability of ﬁnding the
particle anywhere on a sphere of radius r decays exponentially as e−Γ(t−t′)/¯h.
This result provides a remarkable explanation of the law of radioactive
decay: we interpret the emission of a neutron by an unstable nucleus as the
endpoint of a scattering experiment that started months earlier in a nuclear
reactor, where the nucleus was created by absorption of a neutron. More
dramatic is the case of 238U, which decays via emission of an α-particle to
234Th with a mean life ¯h/Γ ≃6.4 Gyr. Because Γ/¯h is tiny, the probability
(12.113) is nearly constant over huge periods of time. Our formalism tells
us that if we were to scatter α-particles oﬀ234Th, they would all eventually
re-emerge, but only after a delay that often exceeds the age of the universe!
Thus 238U is really a long-lived resonance of the (α,234 Th) system, rather
than a stationary state.
It is only because the timescale ¯h/Γ is so long
that we speak of 238U rather than a resonance in the (α, 234Th) system. In
fact, 234Th is itself a resonance, ultimately of Pb. The longevity of 238U is
inevitably associated with a very small probability that 238U will be formed
when we shoot an α-particle at a 234Th nucleus. To see this notice that
the ﬁnal-state wavefunction ⟨r|S|φ; t⟩= ⟨r|φ; t⟩+ ⟨r|T |φ; t⟩, also involves an
unscattered piece. On account of the smallness of Γ, the ratio of probabilities
Prob(α is trapped)
Prob(α unscattered) ≈Γ2m
¯hpR
|⟨ER, l, m|φ⟩|2
(12.114)
is extremely small. Hence it is exceptionally diﬃcult to form 238U by ﬁring α-
particles at 234Th nuclei. Naturally occurring 238U was formed in supernovae,
where the ﬂux of α-particles and neutrons was large enough to overcome this
suppression.
Problems
12.1
Show that the operators eΩ± deﬁned by equation (12.23) obey
H eΩ± = eΩ±(HK ± iǫ) ∓iǫ.
(12.115)
12.2
Obtain the ﬁrst and second order contributions to the S-matrix from
the Feynman rules given in §12.3.
12.3
Derive the Lippmann–Schwinger equation
|±⟩= |E⟩+
1
E −H K ± iǫV |±⟩,
(12.116)
where |±⟩are in and out states of energy E and |E⟩is a free-particle state of
the same energy. In the case that the potential V = V0|χ⟩⟨χ| for some state
|χ⟩and constant V0, solve the Lippmann–Schwinger equation to ﬁnd ⟨χ|±⟩.


Problems
283
12.4
A certain potential V (r) falls as r−n at large distances. Show that
the Born approximation to the total cross-section is ﬁnite only if n > 2. Is
this a problem with the Born approximation?
12.5
Compute the diﬀerential cross section in the Born approximation for
the potential V (r) = V0 exp(−r2/2r2
0). For what energies is the Born ap-
proximation justiﬁed?
12.6
When an electron scatters oﬀan atom, the atom may be excited (or
even ionised). Consider an electron scattering oﬀa hydrogen atom. The
Hamiltonian may be written as H = H0 + H1 where
H0 = ˆp2
1
2m −
e2
4πǫ0r1
+ ˆp2
2
2m
(12.117)
is the Hamiltonian of the hydrogen atom (whose electron is described by co-
ordinate r1) together with the kinetic Hamiltonian of the scattering electron
(coordinate r2), and
H1 =
e2
4πǫ0

1
|r1 −r2| −1
r2

(12.118)
is the interaction of the scattering electron with the atom.
By using H0 in the evolution operators, show that in the Born approx-
imation the amplitude for a collision to scatter the electron from momen-
tum p2 to p′
2 whilst exciting the atom from the state |n, l, m⟩to the state
|n′, l′, m′⟩is
f(p2; n, l, m →p′
2; n′, l′, m′)
= −4π2¯hm
(2π¯h)3
Z
d3r1d3r2 e−iq2·r2⟨n′, l′, m′|r1⟩⟨r1|n, l, m⟩H1(r1, r2),
(12.119)
where q2 is the momentum transferred to the scattering electron. (Neglect
the possibility that the two electrons exchange places.
You may wish to
perform the d3r1 integral by including a factor e−αr1 and then letting α →0.)
Compute the diﬀerential cross-section for the |1, 0, 0⟩→|2, 0, 0⟩transi-
tion and show that at high energies it falls as cosec12(θ/2).
12.7
Use the optical theorem to show that the ﬁrst Born approximation is
not valid for forward scattering.
12.8
A particle scatters oﬀa hard sphere, described by the potential
V (r) =
n ∞
for |r| ≤a
0
otherwise.
(12.120)
By considering the form of the radial wavefunction u(r) in the region r > a,
show that the phase shifts are given by tan δl = jl(ka)/nl(ka), where k =
√
2mE/¯h and jl(kr) and nl(kr) are spherical Bessel functions and Neumann
functions, which are the two independent solutions of the second-order radial
equation
1
r2
d
dr

r2 d
dr u(r)

=
l(l + 1)
r2
−2mE
¯h2

u(r).
(12.121)
In the limit kr →0, show that these functions behave as
jl(kr) →(kr)l
2l + 1
nl(kr) →−2l −1
(kr)l+1 .
(12.122)
Use this to show that in the low-energy limit, the scattering is spherically
symmetric and the total cross-section is four times the classical value.


284
Problems
12.9
Show that in the Born approximation the phase shifts δl(E) for scat-
tering oﬀa spherical potential V (r) are given by
δl(E) ≃−2mk¯h2
Z ∞
0
dr r2V (r) (jl(kr))2 .
(12.123)
When is the approximation valid?
12.10
Two α-particles collide.
Show that when the α-particles initially
have equal and opposite momenta, the diﬀerential cross-section is
dσ
dΩ= |f(θ) + f(θ −π)|2.
(12.124)
Using the formula for f(θ) in terms of partial waves, show that the diﬀerential
cross-section at θ = π/2 is twice what would be expected had the α-particles
been distinguishable.
A moving electron crashes into an electron that is initially at rest. As-
suming both electrons are in the same spin state, show that the diﬀerential
cross-section falls to zero at θ = π/4.


The laws of probability
285
Appendices
Appendix A: The laws of probability
Events are frequently one-oﬀs: Pretty Lady will run in the 4.20 at Sandown Park
only once this year, and if she enters the race next year, her form and the ﬁeld will
be diﬀerent. The probability that we want is for this year’s race. Sometimes events
can be repeated, however. For example, there is no obvious diﬀerence between one
throw of a die and the next throw, so it makes sense to assume that the probability
of throwing a 5 is the same on each throw. When events can be repeated in this
way we seek to assign probabilities in such a way that when we make a very large
number N of trials, the number nA of trials in which event A occurs (for example
5 comes up) satisﬁes
nA ≃pAN.
(A.1)
In any sequence of throws, the ratio nA/N will vary with N, while the probability
pA does not. So the relation (A.1) is rarely an equality. The idea is that we should
choose pA so that nA/N ﬂuctuates in a smaller and smaller interval around pA as
N is increased.
Events can be logically combined to form composite events: if A is the event
that a certain red die falls with 1 up, and B is the event that a white die falls
with 5 up, AB is the event that when both dice are thrown, the red die shows 1
and the white one shows 5. If the probability of A is pA and the probability of B
is pB, then in a fraction ∼pA of throws of the two dice the red die will show 1,
and in a fraction ∼pB of these throws, the white die will have 5 up. Hence the
fraction of throws in which the event AB occurs is ∼pApB so we should take the
probability of AB to be pAB = pApB. In this example A and B are independent
events because we see no reason why the number shown by the white die could
be inﬂuenced by the number that happens to come up on the red one, and vice
versa. The rule for combining the probabilities of independent events to get the
probability of both events happening, is to multiply them:
p(A and B) = p(A)p(B)
(independent events).
(A.2)
Since only one number can come up on a die in a given throw, the event A
above excludes the event C that the red die shows 2; A and C are exclusive events.
The probability that either a 1 or a 2 will show is obtained by adding pA and pC.
Thus, for classical probability
p(A or C) = p(A) + p(C)
(exclusive events).
(A.3)
In the case of reproducible events, this rule is clearly consistent with the principle
that the fraction of trials in which either A or C occurs should be the sum of the
fractions of the trials in which one or the other occurs. If we throw our die, the
number that will come up is certainly one of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6. So by the rule just
given, the sum of the probabilities associated with each of these numbers coming
up has to be unity. Unless we know that the die is loaded, we assume that no


286
Appendix B: Cartesian tensors
number is more likely to come up than another, so all six probabilities must be
equal. Hence, they must all equal 1
6. Generalising this example we have the rules
With just N mutually exclusive outcomes,
N
X
i=1
pi = 1.
If all outcomes are equally likely, pi = 1/N.
(A.4)
Expectation values
A random variable x is a quantity that we can measure
and the value that we get is subject to uncertainty. Suppose for simplicity that
only discrete values xi can be measured. In the case of a die, for example, x could
be the number that comes up, so x has six possible values, x1 = 1 to x6 = 6. If pi
is the probability that we shall measure xi, then the expectation value of x is
⟨x⟩≡
X
i
pixi.
(A.5)
If the event is reproducible, it is easy to show that the average of the values that
we measure on N trials tends to ⟨x⟩as N becomes very large. Consequently, ⟨x⟩
is often referred to as the average of x.
Suppose we have two random variables, x and y. Let pij be the probability
that our measurement returns xi for the value of x and yj for the value of y. Then
the expectation of the sum x + y is
⟨x + y⟩=
X
ij
pij(xi + yj) =
X
ij
pijxi +
X
ij
pijyj
(A.6)
But P
j pij is the probability that we measure xi regardless of what we measure
for y, so it must equal pi. Similarly P
i pij = pj, the probability of measuring yj
irrespective of what we get for x. Inserting these expressions in to (A.6) we ﬁnd
⟨x + y⟩= ⟨x⟩+ ⟨y⟩.
(A.7)
That is, the expectation value of the sum of two random variables is the sum of
the variables’ individual expectation values, regardless of whether the variables are
independent or not.
A useful measure of the amount by which the value of a random variable
ﬂuctuates from trial to trial is the variance of x:

(x −⟨x⟩)2
=

x2
−2 ⟨x ⟨x⟩⟩+

⟨x⟩2
,
(A.8)
where we have made use of equation (A.7). The expectation ⟨x⟩is not a random
variable, but has a deﬁnite value. Consequently ⟨x ⟨x⟩⟩= ⟨x⟩2 and

⟨x⟩2
= ⟨x⟩2,
so the variance of x is related to the expectations of x and x2 by

∆2
x

≡

(x −⟨x⟩)2
=

x2
−⟨x⟩2 .
(A.9)
Appendix B: Cartesian tensors
Vector notation is very powerful, but sometimes it is necessary to step outside
it and work explicitly with the components of vectors. This is especially true in
quantum mechanics, because when operators are in play we have less ﬂexibility
about the order in which we write symbols, and standard vector notation can be
prescriptive about order. For example if we want p to operate on a but not b,
we have to write b to the left of p and a on the right, but this requirement is
incompatible with the vectorial requirements if the classical expression would be
p × (a × b). The techniques of Cartesian tensors resolve this kind of problem.
Even in classical physics tensor notation enables us to use concepts that cannot be
handled by vectors. In particular, it extends eﬀortlessly to spaces with more than
three dimensions, such as spacetime, which vector notation does only in a limited
way.
Instead of writing a, we write ai for the ith component of the vector. Then
a · b becomes P
i aibi. When a subscript is used twice in a product, as i is here,
it is generally summed over and we speak of the subscript on a being contracted
on the subscript on b.
The ijth component of the 3 × 3 identity matrix is denoted δij and called the
Kronecker delta: so
δij =

1
if i = j
0
otherwise.
(B.1)


Cartesian tensors
287
The equation ai = P
j δijaj expresses the fact that the identity matrix times a
equals a. The scalar product often appears in the form a · b = P
ij δijaibj. To see
that this is equivalent to the usual expression, we do the sum over j. Then the
delta vanishes except when j = i, when it is unity, and we are left with P
i qibi.
Notice that it does not matter in what order the symbols appear; we have also
a · b = P
ij aiδijbj, etc. – when using Cartesian tensors, the information that in
vector notation is encoded in the positions of symbols is carried by the way the
subscripts on diﬀerent symbols are coupled together.
To make the vector product we need to introduce the alternating symbol
or Levi–Civita symbol ǫijk. This is a set of 27 zeros and ones deﬁned such that
ǫ123 = 1 and the sign changes if any two indices are swapped.
So ǫ213 = −1,
ǫ231 = 1, etc. If we cyclically permute the indices, changing 123 into ﬁrst 312 and
then 231, we are swapping two pairs each time, so there are two cancelling changes
of sign. That is, ǫ123 = ǫ312 = ǫ231 = 1 and ǫ213 = ǫ321 = ǫ132 = −1. All the
remaining 21 components of the alternating symbol vanish, because they have at
least two subscripts equal, and swapping these equal subscripts we learn that this
component is equal to minus itself, and therefore must be zero.
We now have
(a × b)i =
X
jk
ǫijkajbk.
(B.2)
To prove this statement, we explicitly evaluate the right side for i = 1, 2 and 3.
For example, setting i = 1 the right side becomes P
jk ǫ1jkajbk. In this sum ǫ1jk
is non-vanishing only when j is diﬀerent from k and neither is equal one. So there
are only two terms:
ǫ123a2b3 + ǫ132a3a2 = a2b3 −a3b2
(B.3)
which is by deﬁnition the third component of a × b.
A few simple rules enable us to translate between vector and tensor notation.
1. Fundamentally we are writing down the general component of some quantity,
so if that quantity is a vector, there should be one subscript that is “spare”
in the sense that it is not contracted with another subscript. Similarly, if the
quantity is a scalar, all indices should be contracted, while a tensor quantity
has two spare indices.
2. Each scalar product is expressed by choosing a letter that has not already
been used for a subscript and making it the subscript of both the vectors
involved in the product.
3. Each vector product is expressed by choosing three letters, say i, j and k and
using them as subscripts of an ǫ. The second letter becomes the subscript
that comes before the cross, and the third letter becomes the subscript of the
vector that comes after the cross.
We need a lemma to handle vector triple products:
X
i
ǫijkǫirs = δjrδks −δkrδjs
(B.4)
Before we prove this identity (which should be memorised), notice its shape: on
the left we have two epsilons with a contracted subscript. On the right we have
two products of deltas, the subscripts of which are matched “middle to middle,
end to end” and “middle to end, end to middle”. Now the proof. For the sum on
the left to be non-vanishing, both epsilons must be non-vanishing for some value
of i. For that value of i, the subscripts j and k must take the values that i does
not. For example, if i is 1, j and k must between them be 2 and 3. For the same
reason r and s must also between them be 2 and 3. So either j = r and k = s
or j = s and k = r. In the ﬁrst case, if ijk is an even permutation of 123, then
so is irs, or if ijk is an odd permutation, then so is irs. Hence in the ﬁrst case
either both epsilons are equal to 1, or they are both equal to −1 and their product
is guaranteed to be 1. The ﬁrst pair of deltas on the right cover this case. If, on
the other hand, j = s and k = r, irs will be an odd permutation of 123 if ijk is
an even one, and vice versa if ijk is an odd permutation. Hence in this case one
epsilon is equal to 1 and the other is equal to −1 and their product is certainly
equal to −1. The second product of deltas covers this case. This completes the
proof of equation (B.4) because we have shown that the two sides always take the
same value no matter what values we give to the subscripts.
Besides enabling us to translate vector products into tensor notation, the
alternating symbol enables us to form the determinant of any 3×3 matrix. In fact,
this is the symbol’s core role and its use for vector products is a spinoﬀfrom it.


288
Appendix C: Fourier series and transforms
The simplest expression for det(A) is
det(A) =
X
ijk
ǫijkA1iA2jA3k.
(B.5)
A more sophisticated expression that is often invaluable is
det(A)ǫrst =
X
ijk
ǫijkAriAsjAtk.
(B.6)
These expressions are best treated as the deﬁnition of det(A) and used to derive
the usual rule for the evaluation of a determinant by expansion down a row or
column. This popular rule is actually a poor way to deﬁne a determinant, and a
dreadful way of evaluating one. It should be avoided whenever possible.
Appendix C: Fourier series and transforms
The amplitude for a particle to be located at x and the amplitude for the particle
to have momentum p are related by Fourier transforms, so they play a signiﬁcant
role in quantum mechanics. In this appendix we derive the basic formulae. Like
Fourier1 himself we start by considering a function of one variable, f(x), that is
periodic with period L: that is, f(x + L) = f(x) for all x. We assume that f can
be expressed as a sum of sinusoidal waves with wavelength L:
f(x) =
∞
X
n=−∞
Fne2πinx/L,
(C.1)
where the Fn are complex numbers to be determined. At this stage this is just
a hypothesis – only 127 years after Fourier introduced his series did Stone2 prove
that the sum on the right always converges to the function on the left. However
numerical experiments soon convince us that the hypothesis is valid because it is
straightforward to determine what the coeﬃcients Fn must be, so we can evaluate
them for some specimen functions f and see whether the series converges to the
function. To determine the Fn we simply multiply both sides of the equation by
e−2πimx/L and integrate from −L/2 to L/2:3
Z L/2
−L/2
dx e−2πimx/Lf(x) =
∞
X
n=−∞
Fn
Z L/2
−L/2
dx e2πi(n−m)x/L
= LFm,
(C.2)
where the second equality follows because for n̸ = m the integral of the exponential
on the right vanishes, so there is only one non-zero term in the series. Thus the
expansion coeﬃcients have to be
Fm = 1
L
Z L/2
−L/2
dx e−2πimx/Lf(x).
(C.3)
In terms of the wavenumbers of our waves,
kn ≡2πn
L ,
(C.4)
our formulae become
f(x) =
∞
X
n=−∞
Fneiknx
;
Fm = 1
L
Z L/2
−L/2
dx e−ikmxf(x).
(C.5)
At this stage it proves expedient to replace the Fn with rescaled coeﬃcients
ef(kn) ≡LFn.
(C.6)
so our equations become
f(x) =
∞
X
n=−∞
1
L
ef(kn) eiknx
;
ef(km) =
Z L/2
−L/2
dx e−ikmxf(x).
(C.7)
1 After dropping out from a seminary Joseph Fourier (1768–1830) joined the Auxerre
Revolutionary Committee. The Revolution’s fratricidal violence led to his arrest but he
avoided the guillotine by virtue of Robespierre’s fall in 1794. He invented Fourier series
while serving Napoleon as Prefect of Grenoble. His former teachers Laplace and Lagrange
were not convinced.
2 Marshall Stone strengthened a theorem proved by Karl Weierstrass in 1885.
3 You can check that the integration can be over any interval of length L. We have
chosen the interval (−1
2 L, 1
2 L) for later convenience.


Operators in classical statistical mechanics
289
Now we eliminate L from the ﬁrst equation in favour of the diﬀerence dk ≡kn+1 −
kn = 2π/L and have
f(x) =
∞
X
n=−∞
dk
2π
ef(kn) eiknx
;
ef(km) =
Z L/2
−L/2
dx e−ikmxf(x).
(C.8)
Finally we imagine the period getting longer and longer without limit. As L grows
the diﬀerence dk between successive values of kn becomes smaller and smaller, so
kn becomes a continuous variable k, and the sum in the ﬁrst equation of (C.8)
becomes an integral. Hence in the limit of inﬁnite L we are left with
f(x) =
Z ∞
−∞
dk
2π
ef(k) eikx
;
ef(k) =
Z ∞
−∞
dx e−ikxf(x).
(C.9)
These are the basic formulae of Fourier transforms.
The original restriction to
periodic functions has been lifted because any function can be considered to repeat
itself after an inﬁnite interval. The only restriction on f for these formulae to be
valid is that it vanishes suﬃciently fast at inﬁnity for the integral in the second of
equations (C.9) to converge: the requirement proves to be that
R ∞
−∞dx |f|2 exists,
which requires that asymptotically |f| < |x|−1/2. Physicists generally don’t worry
too much about this restriction.
Using the second of equations (C.9) to eliminate the Fourier transform ef from
the ﬁrst equation, we have
f(x) =
Z ∞
−∞
dk
2π
Z ∞
−∞
dx′ eik(x−x′)f(x′).
(C.10)
Mathematicians stop here because our next step is illegal.4 Physicists reverse the
order of the integrations in equation (C.10) and write
f(x) =
Z ∞
−∞
dx′ f(x′)
Z ∞
−∞
dk
2π eik(x−x′).
(C.11)
Comparing this equation with equation (2.41) we see that the inner integral on the
right satisﬁes the deﬁning condition of the Dirac delta function, and we have
δ(x −x′) =
Z ∞
−∞
dk
2π eik(x−x′).
(C.12)
Appendix D: Operators in classical statistical mechanics
In classical statistical mechanics we are interested in the dynamics of a system with
N degrees of freedom. We do not know the system’s state, which would be quan-
tiﬁed by its position q = (q1, . . . , qN) and the canonically conjugate momentum
p. Our limited knowledge is contained in the probability density ψ(q, p), which is
deﬁned such that the probability of the system being in the elementary phase-space
volume dτ = dNq dNp is ψ(q, p) dτ.
Over time q and p evolve according to Hamilton’s equations
˙q = ∂H
∂p
;
˙p = −∂H
∂q ,
(D.1)
and ψ evolves such that probability is conserved:
0 = ∂ψ
∂t + ∂
∂q · ( ˙qψ) + ∂
∂p · ( ˙pψ)
= ∂ψ
∂t + ∂H
∂p · ∂ψ
∂q −∂H
∂q · ∂ψ
∂p
= ∂ψ
∂t + {ψ, H},
(D.2)
where the second equality follows from substituting for ˙q and ˙p from Hamilton’s
equations, and the last line follows from the deﬁnition of a Poisson bracket: if
4 It is legitimate to reverse the order of integration only when the integrand is abso-
lutely convergent, i.e., the integral of its absolute value is ﬁnite. This condition is clearly
not satisﬁed in the case of eikx. By breaking the proper rules we obtain an expression
for an object, the Dirac delta function, that is not a legitimate function. However, it is
extremely useful.


290
Appendix D: Operators in classical statistical mechanics
Box D.1: Classical operators for a single particle
In the simplest case, our system consists of a single particle with Hamiltonian
H = 1
2p2/m + V (x). Then the operators associated with px, x, H and Lz are
ˆpx = −i¯h{·, px} = −i¯h ∂
∂x
;
ˆx = −i¯h{·, x} = i¯h ∂
∂px
ˆH = −i¯h{·, H} = −i¯h
 p
m · ∇−∇V · ∂
∂p

ˆLz = −i¯h{·, Lz} = −i¯h{·, xpy −ypx}
= −i¯h

x ∂
∂y −y ∂
∂x + px ∂
∂py −py ∂
∂px

.
(1)
Notice that d
(p2)̸ = (ˆp)2. The commutators of these operators are
[ˆx, ˆpx] = 0
;
[ˆLx, ˆLy] = i¯hˆLz.
(2)
(The easiest way to derive the second of these results is to apply (D.8).)
F(q, p) and G(q, p) are any two functions on phase space, the Poisson bracket
{F, G} is deﬁned to be
{F, G} ≡
X
i
∂F
∂qi
∂G
∂pi −∂F
∂pi
∂G
∂qi .
(D.3)
We use the Poisson bracket to associate with F an operator ˆF on other func-
tions of phase space: we deﬁne the operator ˆF by its action on an arbitrary function
ψ(p, q):
ˆFψ ≡−i¯h{ψ, F}.
(D.4)
Here ¯h is some constant with the dimensions of the product p · q – i.e., the inverse
of the dimensions of the Poisson bracket – and is introduced so the operator ˆF has
the same dimensions as the function F. The factor i is introduced to ensure that
with the obvious deﬁnition of an inner product, the operator ˆF is Hermitian:
Z
dτ φ∗ˆFψ = −i¯h
 Z
dNp dNq φ∗∂ψ
∂q · ∂F
∂p −
Z
dNq dNp φ∗∂ψ
∂p · ∂F
∂q

= i¯h
 Z
dNp dNq ∂φ∗
∂q · ∂F
∂p ψ −
Z
dNq dNp ∂φ∗
∂p · ∂F
∂q ψ

=
Z
dτ (ˆFφ)∗ψ.
(D.5)
When written in terms of the classical Hamiltonian operator ˆH, the classical evo-
lution equation (D.2) takes a familiar form
i¯h∂ψ
∂t = ˆHψ.
(D.6)
It is straightforward (if tedious) to show that Poisson brackets, like a commu-
tators, satisﬁes the Jacobi identity (cf. 2.102)
{A, {B, C}} + {B, {C, A}} + {C, {A, B}} = 0.
(D.7)
We use this identity to express the commutator of two such operators in terms of
the Poisson bracket of the underlying functions:
[ˆA, ˆB]ψ = −¯h2 {{ψ, B}, A} −{{ψ, A}, B}

= ¯h2{ψ, {A, B}}
= i¯h d
{A, B}ψ.
(D.8)
where
d
{A, B} denotes the operator associated with the function {A, B}.
Let A(p, q) be some function on phase space. Then the rate of change of the
value of A along a phase trajectory is
dA
dt = ∂A
∂p · ˙p + ∂A
∂q · ˙q = {A, H}.
(D.9)
Consequently A is a constant of motion if and only if 0 = {A, H}, which by (D.8)
requires its operator to commute with the Hamiltonian operator: as in quantum
mechanics, A is a constant of the motion if and only if [ˆA, ˆH] = 0.


Lie groups and Lie algebras
291
It is instructive to repeat the analysis of §4.2 with the classical operators
of a single-particle system (Box D.1).
If we displace the system through a, its
probability density becomes
ψ′(x, p) ≡ψ(x −a, p) =
"
1 −a · ∂
∂x + 1
2!

a · ∂
∂x
2
−. . .
#
ψ(x, p)
= exp

−a · ∂
∂x

ψ(x, p) = exp

−ia · ˆp
¯h

ψ(x, p).
(D.10)
Thus ˆp/¯h is the generator of displacements, as in quantum mechanics. Displace-
ment of the system by δa clearly increases the expectation of x by δa, so with
dτ ≡d3x d3p
⟨x⟩+ δa =
Z
dτ xψ′(x, p) =
Z
dτ x

1 −iδa · ˆp
¯h

ψ(x, p) + O(δa2).
(D.11)
This equation will hold for an arbitrary probability density ψ if and only if
i¯hδij =
Z
dτ xiˆpjψ =
Z
dτ (ˆpjxi)∗ψ = i¯h
Z
dτ {xi, pj}ψ,
(D.12)
where the second equality uses the fact that ˆpj is Hermitian. Thus equation (D.11)
holds if and and only if the Poisson brackets {xi, pj} rather than the commutators
[ˆxi, ˆpj] satisfy the canonical commutation relations. This crucial diﬀerence between
the quantum and classical cases arises from the way we calculate expectation values:
in classical physics the quantum rule ⟨Q⟩= ⟨ψ|Q|ψ⟩is replaced by
⟨Q⟩=
Z
dNq dNp Qψ,
(D.13)
where (i) Q is the function not the associated operator, and (ii) ψ occurs once not
twice because it is a probability not a probability amplitude. On account of these
diﬀerences, whereas equation (4.21) yields [xi, pj] = i¯hδij, its classical analogue,
(D.11) yields {xi, pj} = δij.
Appendix E: Lie groups and Lie algebras
A group is a set of objects that is equipped with an associative product and an
identity member: given any two members a, b of a group G, there is a member of
G, c = ab, and there is a member 1 such that 1a = a for any a in G. For any a
there must be an inverse a−1 such that aa−1 = 1. The associativity of the product
means that for any a, b, c ∈G, (ab)c = a(bc). If the multiplication is commutative
(ab = ba always) then the group is Abelian.
Some groups, such as that of the rotations that turn a square into itself, have
a ﬁnite number of (discrete) members, but others, such as the group SO(3) of all
three-dimensional rotations have an inﬁnite number of members.1 Moreover, in a
group such as SO(3) some members are almost identical to other members because
they are rotations through almost the same angle around almost the same axis. A
Lie group is such a continuous group.2
The linear transformations of vector spaces provide representations of groups,
that is, concrete realisations of an abstract group in which each group member is
represented by a linear transformation in such a way that the product of group
members is faithfully represented by the compounding of transformations. We gen-
erally quantify the linear transformations of an n-dimensional vector space with
n × n matrices, so a representation of a group consists of a rule associating each
group member a with a matrix Ma such that if ab = c, then Ma · Mb = Mc.
In Chapter 4 we saw how translations and rotations of a system are mir-
rored by unitary transformations U(a) and U(α) of the system’s ket |ψ⟩. These
unitary transformations form representations of the groups of translations and ro-
tations. So group theory, and especially results relating to possible representations
of groups, are important for quantum mechanics. In particular, quantum mechan-
ics enormously extends the range of representations that are physically signiﬁcant
by introducing the usually inﬁnite-dimensional (Hilbert) space of possible kets. By
1 The group formed by orthogonal rotations in n-dimensional space is called SO(n).
Each group member is most naturally represented by a n × n real orthogonal matrix with
unit determinant.
2 Technically, a Lie group is a group that is also a diﬀerentiable manifold.


292
Appendix F: The hidden symmetry of hydrogen
contrast, in classical physics groups generally only have ﬁnite-dimensional repre-
sentations.
The structure of a Lie group is largely determined by the group members that
lie near the identity, because by left-multiplying any member of a neighbourhood
of the identity by a, we can map this neighbourhood into a neighbourhood of a.
Moreover, if we repeatedly multiply the identity by a nearby group member, we
can generate members that lie far from the identity, and if the structure of the
group is simple, we can generate any group member.
This logic becomes very
clear when we work with a quantum-mechanical representation: a member near
the identity of SO(3) is represented by the matrix I −iδα · J, where |δα| ≪1 and
the result of repeatedly multiplying the identity by this member is represented by
U(α) = e−iα·J (eq. 4.12).
The inﬁnitesimal generators of the group – in the case of SO(3) the angular-
momentum operators Ji – form a Lie algebra because they have the following
properties: (i) they can be multiplied by (complex) numbers and added, and (ii)
they are equipped with an antisymmetric product (the commutator) which (a)
satisﬁes the Jacobi identity
[A, [B, C]] + [B, [C, A]] + [C, [A, B]] = 0,
(E.1)
and (b) evaluates to a linear combination of the original generators. That is, if
I1, . . . , In are n operators which satisfy [Ii, Ij] = i P
k ck
ijIk, where ck
ij is a set of
complex numbers, then the set {Ii} forms the basis of an n-dimensional Lie algebra.
In the case of SO(3), n = 3 and ck
ij = iǫijk.
The group SU(2) formed by 2 × 2 unitary matrices with unit determinant
plays a big role in quantum mechanics because it is an important subgroup of the
group of Lorentz transformations. Its Lie algebra is identical to that of SO(3), so
here we have a manifestation of the fact that a Lie group is not entirely determined
by its Lie algebra, although it nearly is. In fact, SU(2) is essentially an extension
of SO(3).
The group SU(3) of 3 × 3 unitary matrices with unit determinant is crucial
for nuclear physics because the quantum ﬁeld whose excitations we call quarks
provides representations of SU(3).
Appendix F: The hidden symmetry of hydrogen
The gross structure of hydrogen is degenerate with respect to both l and m; there
are states with diﬀerent (l, m) that have the same energy. Degeneracy with respect
to m is to be expected whenever the Hamiltonian is rotationally symmetric, but
degeneracy with respect to l is special to the Coulomb potential and indicates the
presence of additional symmetry.
To uncover this symmetry, we deﬁne the Hermitian Runge-Lenz operator
(Problem 8.15)
M ≡1
2¯h(p × L −L × p) −mZe2
4πǫ0
r
r .
(F.1)
The important algebraic properties of this operator are derived (after lengthy
computations) in Problem 8.15.
Crucially it commutes with the Hamiltonian,
[M, H] = 0, so each component of M is associated with a conserved quantity
(§2.2.1) and the unitary transformations that M generates, U(θ) ≡exp(−iθ · M)
where θ is a triple of real numbers, transform stationary states into stationary
states of the same energy because these transformations are dynamical symmetries
of H (§4.3).
The components of M have the commutation relations
[Mi, Mj] = −2i¯h2mH
X
k
ǫijkLk.
(F.2)
Consequently, the action of U(θ) on stationary states of energy E < 0 can be
obtained by using the generators
M′ ≡
1
(2¯h2m|E|)1/2 M,
(F.3)
which have the commutation relations
[M ′
i, M ′
j] = i
X
k
ǫijkLk,
(F.4)


The hidden symmetry of hydrogen
293
Since M′ is an (axial) vector operator, from §4.2 we know that the commutators
between its components and the orbital-angular momentum operators are
[Li, M ′
j] = i
X
k
ǫijkM ′
k.
(F.5)
From equations (F.4) and (F.5) it follows that the components of
M± ≡1
2(L ± M′)
(F.6)
commute with each other because
[M +
i , M −
j ] = 1
4([Li, Lj] −[Li, Mj] + [Mi, Lj] −[Mi, Mj])
= i
4
X
ijk
ǫijk(Lk −Mk + Mk −Lk) = 0
(F.7)
while
[M ±
i , M ±
j ] = 1
4([Li, Lj] ± [Li, Mj] ± [Mi, Lj] + [Mi, M −j])
= i
4
X
k
ǫijk(Lk ± Mk ± Mk + Lk) = i
X
k
ǫijkM ±
k .
(F.8)
Thus the components of M+ and M−satisfy the commutation relations we ﬁrst
encountered in §4.2 in connection with the rotation operators.
These relations
deﬁne the Lie Algebra of the group SU(2) formed by 2×2 unitary matrices with unit
determinant – for a very brief account Lie groups and Lie algebras, see Appendix E.
The group SO(4) formed by the orthogonal rotations of 4-dimensional vectors
has just the Lie algebra that is formed by the operators M±, namely two sets of
three operators that commute with each other like the angular-momentum opera-
tors, with any operator from one set commuting with any in the other set. This
coincidence of the Lie algebras establishes that the invariance group of hydrogen is
SO(4). The manifest spherical symmetry of the atom is just the SO(3) sub-group
of SO(4). The extra dimension of symmetry is obscure because in the classical
limit it is not a point transformation – a mapping of spatial points into spatial
points – but involves momentum in an essential way, so if (x′, p′) is the image of
the phase-space point (x, p), x′ depends on p as well as on x.
The operators M ′
i that generate the hidden symmetries of hydrogen do not
commute with L2, so a general symmetry transformation U(θ) will turn an eigen-
state |l⟩of L2 into a state that is not an eigenstate of L2 (Problem 8.15). For a
judicious choice of θ it is possible move |l⟩into a diﬀerent eigenstate |l ± 1⟩of L2.
This is almost what the ladder operators Al and A†
l of §8.1 accomplish – almost
because Al and A†
l only modify the radial part of the wavefunction, and we have
to change the angular part from Ym
l
to Ym
l±1 by hand.
From the results above and our work with the angular-momentum operators,
we know that a complete set of commuting operators for hydrogen will consist of
H, one component of each of M±, say M +
z and M −
z , and the operators (M +
x )2 +
(M +
y )2 + (M +
z )2 and (M −
x )2 + (M −
y )2 + (M −
z )2. So we could label the members
of a complete set of hydrogen’s stationary states, |E, m+
z , m−
z , m+, m−⟩, with their
eigenvalues with respect to these operators. These ﬁve eigenvalues correspond to
the ﬁve classical constants of motion of Kepler orbits. Five constraints on the six
phase-space coordinates conﬁne the orbit to a one-dimensional sub-manifold (an
ellipse) of phase space. Indeed, in any ﬁxed spherical potential, the direction of
the angular momentum vector conﬁnes the orbit to a plane, and the magnitude
of the angular momentum and the energy together determine the radial scale and
eccentricity of the orbit.
The ﬁfth constant of motion, provided by the hidden
symmetry of the inverse-square law, ﬁxes the point of closest approach to the
centre of attraction (the periapsis). The precession of the periapsis of Mercury’s
orbit demonstrates that the planet moves in a force ﬁeld that deviates from the
inverse-square law. About 10% of this deviation is caused by general relativity and
the rest arises from the gravitational ﬁelds of the other planets, predominantly that
of Jupiter.


294
Appendix G: Lorentz covariant equations
Appendix G: Lorentz covariant equations
Special relativity is about determining how the numbers used by moving observers
to characterise a given system are related to one another. All observers agree on
some numbers such as the electric charge on a particle – these numbers are called
Lorentz scalars. Other numbers, such as energy, belong to a set of four numbers,
called a four-vector. If you know the values assigned by some observer to all four
components of a four-vector, you can predict the values that any other observer
will assign. If you do not know all four numbers, in general you cannot predict
any of the values that a moving observer will assign. The components of every
ordinary three-dimensional vector are associated with the spatial components of a
four-vector, while some other number completes the set as the ‘time component’
of the four-vector. We use the convention that Greek indices run from 0 to 3 while
Roman ones run from 1 to 3; the time component is component 0, followed by the
x component, and so on. All components should have the same dimensions, so, for
example, the energy-momentum four vector is
(p0, p1, p2, p3) ≡(E/c, px, py, pz).
(G.1)
The energies and momenta assigned by an observer who moves at speed v parallel
to the x axis are found by multiplying the four-vector by a Lorentz transformation
matrix. For example, if the primed observer is moving at speed v along the x axis,
then she measures




E′/c
p′
x
p′
y
p′
z



=




γ
−βγ
0
0
−βγ
γ
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1








E/c
px
py
pz



,
(G.2)
where β ≡v/c and the Lorentz factor is γ = 1/
p
1 −β2. The indices on the
four-vector p are written as superscripts because it proves helpful to have a form
of p in which the sign of the time component is reversed. That is we deﬁne
(p0, p1, p2, p3) ≡(−E/c, px, py, pz),
(G.3)
and we write the indices on the left as subscripts to signal the diﬀerence in the time
component. It is straightforward to verify that in the primed frame the components
of the down vector are obtained by multiplication with a matrix that diﬀers slightly
from the one used to transform the up vector




−E′/c
p′
x
p′
y
p′
z



=




γ
βγ
0
0
βγ
γ
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1








−E/c
px
py
pz



.
(G.4)
The Lorentz transformation matrices that appear in equation (G.2) and (G.4) are
inverses of one another. In index notation we write these equations
p′ν =
X
µ
Λν
µpµ
and
p′
ν =
X
µ
Λν
µpµ.
(G.5)
Notice that we sum over one down and one up index; we never sum over two down
or two up indices. Summing over an up and down index is called contraction of
those indices.
The dot product of the up and down forms of a four vector yields a Lorentz
scalar. For example
X
µ
pµpµ = −E2
c2 + p2
x + p2
y + p2
z = −m2
0c2,
(G.6)
where m0 is the particle’s rest mass. Observers in relative motion will typically
assign diﬀerent values to all four components of p and yet from them they will
compute the same value of P
µ pµpµ. The dot product of two diﬀerent four vectors
is also a Lorentz scalar: the value of P
µ pµhµ = P
µ pµhµ is the same in any frame.
The time and space coordinates form a four-vector
(x0, x1, x2, x3) ≡(ct, x, y, z).
(G.7)
In some interval dt of coordinate time, a particle’s position four-vector x increments
by dx and the Lorentz scalar associated with dx is −c2 times the square of the


Lorentz covariance
295
proper-time interval associated with dt:
(dτ)2 = −1
c2
X
µ
dxµdxµ = (dt)2 −1
c2

(dx)2 + (dy)2 + (dz)2	
= (dt)2

1 −v2
c2

= (dt)2(1 −β2).
(G.8)
The proper time dτ is just the elapse of time in the particle’s instantaneous rest
frame; it is the amount by which the hands move on a clock that is tied to the
particle. From the last equality above it follows that dτ = dt/γ, so moving clocks
tick slowly.
The four-velocity of a particle is
uµ = dxµ
dτ
=
dct
dτ , dx
dτ , dy
dτ , dz
dτ

= γ

c, dx
dt , dy
dt , dz
dt

,
(G.9)
where γ is the particle’s Lorentz factor. In a particle’s rest frame the four velocity
points straight into the future: uµ = (1, 0, 0, 0). In any frame
uµuµ = −c2.
(G.10)
The electrostatic potential φ and the magnetic vector potential A form a four
vector
Aµ = (φ/c, Ax, Ay, Az).
(G.11)
Some numbers are members of a set of six numbers that must all be known
in one frame before any of them can be predicted in an arbitrary frame. The six
components of the electric and magnetic ﬁelds form such a set. We arrange them
as the independent, non-vanishing components of an antisymmetric four by four
matrix, called the Maxwell ﬁeld tensor
Fµν ≡




0
−Ex/c
−Ey/c
−Ez/c
Ex/c
0
Bz
−By
Ey/c
−Bz
0
Bx
Ez/c
By
−Bx
0



.
(G.12)
The electric and magnetic ﬁelds seen by a moving observer are obtained by pre-
and post-multiplying this matrix by an appropriate Lorentz transformation matrix
such as that appearing in equation (G.4).
The equation of motion of a particle of rest mass m0 and charge Q is
m0 duλ
dτ
= Q
X
ν
Fλνuν.
(G.13)
The time component of the four-velocity u is γc, and the spatial part is γv, so,
using our expression (G.12) for F, the spatial part of this equation of motion is
γQ(E + v × B) = m0 dγv
dτ
= γm0 dv
dτ + O(β2),
(G.14)
which shows the familiar electrostatic and Lorentz forces in action.
The great merit of establishing these rules is that we can state that the dy-
namics of any system can be determined from equations in which both sides are
of the same Lorentz-covariant type. That is, both sides are Lorentz scalars, or
four-vectors, or antisymmetric matrices, or whatever. Any correct equation that
does not conform to this pattern must be a fragment of a set of equations that do.
Once a system’s governing equations have been written in Lorentz covariant form,
we can instantly transform them to whatever reference frame we prefer to work in.
Lagrangian and Hamiltonian for motion in an electromagnetic ﬁeld
Ev-
ery particle traces a path x(τ) through space-time. This path is called the particle’s
world line. The particle’s action S[x(τ)] is a functional of the world line – a
number that depends on the whole line. In fact S[x] is given by
S[x] =
Z
dτ s[x(τ)],
(G.15)
where s is a function of x(τ) and its derivatives. Quantum mechanics ensures that
the world line taken by a particle as it moves from a given event x1 to a second
event x2 is the one that extremises S. Thus the particle’s dynamics is determined
by the action S, which is in turn determined by the function s[x].
The action S must be a Lorentz scalar since there is no obvious higher n-tuple
into which we can ﬁt it. The proper time τ is a Lorentz scalar, so s must be a
scalar too, and to determine the form of s we have only to ask what scalars we can


296
Appendix G: Lorentz covariant equations
construct from the world-line x(τ) and quantities such as A, F associated with the
electromagnetic ﬁeld in which the particle moves.
First we note that S shouldn’t depend on our choice of origin, so only deriva-
tives of x(τ) such as dx/dτ should occur in s, not x itself.
Furthermore, the
Euler-Lagrange equation, which is used to extract equations of motion from a La-
grangian, involves diﬀerentiation with respect to the variable that parametrises
position along the extremal path, in this case τ. So we will get a second-order
equation of motion, if s depends on dx/dτ, but not on higher derivatives of x(τ).
Similarly, the Euler-Lagrange equation involves diﬀerentiation with respect to the
position vector x, so if the equation of motion is to depend on F and not its deriva-
tives, s should depend on A but not F. So the Lorentz scalars to consider are (i)
|dx/dτ|2 = −c2 and (ii) (dx/dτ) · A – we exclude |A|2 from consideration since
its contribution to S proves to be both gauge- and world-line dependent. So the
simplest thing to try is
S =
Z
dτ

−m0c2 + Qdx
dτ · A

,
(G.16)
where we’ve included the rest mass m0 for future convenience and Q is a constant
scalar, which will turn out to be the charge.
Now that we have chosen a form for s, we should ﬁnd the diﬀerential equation
of the world line that extremises S between given events x1 and x2. Unfortunately,
this is a non-standard problem because the elapse of proper time between these
events depends on the world line taken between them, and the Euler-Lagrange
equations require the integration variable to have ﬁxed values at the end-points.
By contrast, the coordinate time t does have ﬁxed values at x1 and x2, so we
change integration variable from τ to t. Since dt/dτ = u0/c = γ, we obtain
S =
Z
dt

−m0c2p
1 −v2/c2 + Qdx
dt · A

.
(G.17)
If we are willing to restrict ourselves to non-relativistic motion, we can simplify
equation (G.17) by expanding the square root and discarding terms smaller than
v2/c2. Then we have
S =
Z
dt

−m0c2

1 −1
2
v2
c2

+ Qdx
dt · A + QcA0

,
(G.18)
where the term with A0 arises because the vectors x and A are now three- rather
than four-dimensional so we have to add explicitly the contributions of the time
components to the contraction of two four-vectors.
The term in the integrand
−m0c2 yields a contribution to S that is world-line-independent and therefore
plays no role in determining the world line. Hence we may delete this term and
arrive at our ﬁnal expression for the action of a charged, non-relativistic particle
S =
Z
dt

1
2m0v2 + Qdx
dt · A −Qφ

,
(G.19)
where φ = −A0/c is the electrostatic potential.
In classical mechanics the Lagrangian is a function L(x, ˙x) of position and
velocity ˙x ≡dx/dt that yields the action through
S[(x(t)] =
Z
dt L

x, dx
dt

.
(G.20)
Hence equation (G.19) states that the Lagrangian of a charged particle is
L (x, ˙x) = 1
2m0| ˙x|2 + Q ˙x · A −Qφ.
(G.21)
The classical momentum is deﬁned to be
p ≡∂L
∂˙x = m0 ˙x + QA,
(G.22)
and the classical Hamiltonian is deﬁned to be
H(x, p) ≡p · ˙x −L
= p · p −QA
m0
−|p −QA|2
2m0
−Qp −QA
m0
· A + Qφ
= |p −QA|2
2m0
+ Qφ.
(G.23)


Thomas precession
297
Appendix H: Thomas precession
In this appendix we generalise the equation of motion of an electron’s spin (eq. 8.69)
dS
dt = gQ
2m0 S × B
(H.1)
from the electron’s rest frame to a frame in which the electron is moving. We do
this by writing equation (H.1) in Lorentz covariant form (Appendix G).
The ﬁrst step in upgrading equation (H.1) to Lorentz covariant form is to
replace S and B with covariant structures. We hypothesise that the numbers Si
comprise the spatial components of a four vector that has vanishing time component
in the particle’s rest frame. Thus
(s0, s1, s2, s3) = (0, Sx, Sy, Sz)
(rest frame),
(H.2)
and we can calculate sµ in an arbitrary frame by multiplying this equation by an
appropriate Lorentz transformation matrix. Since in the rest frame sµ is orthogonal
to the particle’s four-velocity uµ, the equation
uµsµ = 0
(H.3)
holds in any frame. In equation (8.69) B clearly has to be treated as part of the
Maxwell ﬁeld tensor Fµν (eq. G.12). In the particle’s rest frame dt = dτ and
X
ν
Fµνsν =




0
−Ex/c
−Ey/c
−Ez/c
Ex/c
0
Bz
−By
Ey/c
−Bz
0
Bx
Ez/c
By
−Bx
0








0
Sx
Sy
Sz



=




−S · E/c
S × B



(H.4)
so equation (H.1) coincides with the spatial components of the covariant equation
dsµ
dτ = gQ
2m0
X
ν
Fµνsν.
(H.5)
This cannot be the correct equation, however, because it is liable to violate the
condition (H.3).
To see this, consider the case in which the particle moves at
constant velocity and dot equation (H.5) through by the ﬁxed four-velocity uν.
Then we obtain
X
µ
d
dτ (uµsµ) = gQ
2m0
X
µν
Fµνuµsν.
(H.6)
The left side has to be zero but there is no reason why the right side should vanish.
We can ﬁx this problem by adding an extra term to the right side, so that
dsµ
dτ = gQ
2m0
 X
ν
Fµνsν −
X
λν
sλFλν uνuµ
c2
!
.
(H.7)
When this equation is dotted through by uµ, and equation (G.10) is used, the
right side becomes proportional to P
µν Fµν(sµuν + sνuµ), which vanishes because
F is antisymmetric in its indices while the bracket into which it is contracted is
symmetric in the same indices.1
If our particle is accelerating, equation (H.7) is still incompatible with equation
(H.3), as becomes obvious when one dots through by uµ and includes a non-zero
term duµ/dτ. Fortunately, this objection is easily ﬁxed by adding a third term to
the right side. We then have our ﬁnal covariant equation of motion for s
dsµ
dτ = gQ
2m0
 X
ν
Fµνsν −
X
λν
sλFλν uνuµ
c2
!
+ 1
c2
X
λ
sλ duλ
dτ uµ.
(H.8)
In the rest frame the spatial components of this covariant equation coincide with
the equation (8.69) that we started from because ui = 0. The two new terms on
the right side ensure that s remains perpendicular to the four-velocity u as it must
do if it is to have vanishing time component in the rest frame.
The last term on the right of equation (H.8) is entirely generated by the
particle’s acceleration; it would survive even in the case g = 0 of vanishing magnetic
moment. Thus the spin of an accelerating particle precesses regardless of torques.
This precession is called Thomas precession.2
1 Here’s a proof that the contraction of tensors S and A that are respectively sym-
metric and antisymmetric in their indices vanishes.
P
µν SµνAµν = P
µν SνµAµν =
−P
µν SνµAνµ. This establishes that the sum is equal to minus itself. Zero is the only
number that has this property.
2 L.T. Thomas, Phil. Mag. 3, 1 (1927). For an illuminating discussion see §11.11 of
Classical Electrodynamics by J.D. Jackson (Wiley).


298
Appendix H: Thomas precession
If the particle’s acceleration is entirely due to the electromagnetic force that
it experiences because it is charged, its equation of motion is (G.13). Using this in
equation (H.8), we ﬁnd
dsµ
dτ =
Q
2m0
 
g
X
ν
Fµνsν −(g −2)
X
λν
sλFλν uνuµ
c2
!
.
(H.9)
For electrons, g = 2.002 and to a good approximation the extra terms we have
added cancel and our originally conjectured equation (H.5) holds after all. We now
specialise on the unusually simple and important case in which g = 2.
From our equation of motion of the covariant object s we derive the equation
of motion of the three-vector S whose components are the expectation values of
the spin operators. We choose to work in the rest frame of the atom. By equation
(H.2), S is related to s by a time-dependent Lorentz transformation from this frame
to the electron’s rest frame. We align our x axis with the direction of the required
boost, so




0
Sx
Sy
Sz



=




γ
−βγ
0
0
−βγ
γ
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1








s0
s1
s2
s3



.
(H.10)
The time equation implies that s0 = βs1, so the x equation can be written
Sx = γ(s1 −βs0) = γ(1 −β2)s1 = s1
γ = s1(1 −1
2β2 + · · ·).
(H.11)
The y and z components of equation (H.10) state that the corresponding compo-
nents of S and s are identical. Since s1 is the projection of the spatial part of s
onto the particle’s velocity v, we can summarise these results in the single equation
S = s −v · s
2c2 v + O(β4)
(H.12)
as one can check by dotting through with the unit vectors in the three spatial
directions.
Diﬀerentiating with respect to proper time and discarding terms of
order β2, we ﬁnd
dS
dτ = ds
dτ −
1
2c2
dv
dτ · s

v −v · s
2c2
dv
dτ + O(β2).
(H.13)
Equation (H.9) implies that with g = 2
ds
dτ = Q
m0
s0
c E + s × B

= Q
m0
v · s
c2 E + s × B

,
(H.14)
where the second equality uses the relation s0 = βs1 = (v · s)/c. We now use this
equation and equation (G.14) to eliminate ds/dτ and dv/dτ from equation (H.13).
dS
dτ =
Q
2m0c2
 (v · s)E −(E · s)v + 2c2s × B

+ O(β2)
=
Q
2m0c2
 S × (E × v) + 2c2S × B

+ O(β2).
(H.15)
Since we are working in the atom’s rest frame, B = 0 unless we are applying an
external electric ﬁeld. The diﬀerence between the electron’s proper time τ and the
atom’s proper time t is O(β2), so we can replace τ with t. We assume that E is
generated by an electrostatic potential Φ(r) that is a function of radius only. Then
E = −∇Φ = −(dΦ/dr)r/r points in the radial direction. Using this relation in
equation (H.15) we ﬁnd
dS
dt =
Q
2m0c2

−1
r
dΦ
dr S × (r × v) + 2c2S × B

.
(H.16)
When r × v is replaced by ¯hL/m0, we obtain equation (8.70). The factor of two
diﬀerence between the coeﬃcients of S in the spin-orbit and Zeeman Hamiltonians
(8.71) and (8.72) that so puzzled the pioneers of quantum mechanics, arises be-
cause the variable in equation (H.5) is not the usual spin operator but a Lorentz
transformed version of it. The required factor of two emerges from the derivatives
of v in equation (H.13). Hence it is a consequence of the fact that the electron’s
rest frame is accelerating.


Dipole-dipole interaction
299
Appendix I: Matrix elements for a dipole-dipole
interaction
We calculate the matrix elements obtained by squeezing the hyperﬁne Hamiltonian
(8.81) between states that would all be ground states if the nucleus had no magnetic
dipole moment. We assume that these are S states, and therefore have a spherically
symmetric spatial wavefunction ψ(r). They diﬀer only in their spins. In practice
they will be the eigenstates |j, m⟩of the total angular momentum operators J2 and
Jz that can be constructed by adding the nuclear and electron spins. We use the
symbol s as a shorthand for j, m or whatever other eigenvalues we decide to use.
The matrix elements are
Mss′ ≡⟨ψ, s|HHFS|ψ, s′⟩=
Z
d3x ρ(r)⟨s|HHFS|s′⟩,
(I.1a)
where
ρ(r) ≡|ψ(r)|2,
(I.1b)
and for given s, s′ ⟨s|HHFS|s′⟩is a function of position x only. Substituting for
HHFS from equation (8.81) we have
Mss′ = µ0
4π
Z
d3x ρ⟨s|µN · ∇×
n
∇×
µe
r
o
|s′⟩.
(I.2)
We now use tensor notation (Appendix B) to extract the spin operators from the
integral, ﬁnding
Mss′ = µ0
4π
X
ijklm
ǫijkǫklm⟨s|µNiµem|s′⟩I,
(I.3a)
where
I ≡
Z
d3x ρ(r) ∂2r−1
∂xj∂xl .
(I.3b)
The domain of integration is a large sphere centred on the origin. On evaluat-
ing the derivatives of r−1 and writing the volume element d3x in spherical polar
coordinates, the integral becomes
I =
Z
ρ(r)r2dr
Z
d2Ω

3xjxl
r5
−δjl
r3

.
(I.4)
We integrate over polar angles ﬁrst.
If j̸ = l, the ﬁrst term integrates to zero
because the contribution from a region in which xj is positive is exactly cancelled
by a contribution from a region in which xj is negative. When j = l, we orient our
axes so that xj is the z axis. Then the angular integral becomes
Z
dΩ

3xjxl
r5
−δjl
r3

= 2π
r3
Z
dθ sin θ(3 cos2 θ −1) = 0.
(I.5)
The vanishing of the angular integral implies that no contribution to the integral of
equation (I.3b) comes from the entire region r > 0. However, we cannot conclude
that the integral vanishes entirely because the coeﬃcient of ρ in the radial integral
of (I.4) is proportional to 1/r, so the radial integral is divergent for ρ(0)̸ = 0.
Since any contribution comes from the immediate vicinity of the origin, we
return to our original expression but restrict the region of integration to an in-
ﬁnitesimal sphere around the origin. We approximate ρ(r) by ρ(0) and take it out
of the integral. Then we can invoke the divergence theorem to state that
I = ρ(0)
Z
d3x ∂2r−1
∂xj∂xl =
Z
d2Ωrxj ∂r−1
∂xl ,
(I.6)
where we have used the fact that on the surface of a sphere of radius r the inﬁnites-
imal surface element is d2S = d2Ωrx. We now evaluate the surviving derivative of
1/r:
I = −ρ(0)
Z
d2Ωxjxl
r2
= −4π
3 ρ(0)δjl,
(I.7)
where we have again exploited the fact that the integral vanishes by symmetry if
j̸ = l, and that when j = l it can be evaluated by taking xj to be z. Inserting this
value of I in equation (I.3a), we have
Mss′ = −µ0
3 ρ(0)
X
ijklm
ǫijkǫklmδjl⟨s|µNiµem|s′⟩.
(I.8)
Now
X
ijklm
ǫijkǫklmδjl =
X
ijkm
ǫijkǫkjm = −
X
ijkm
ǫijkǫmjk
(I.9)


300
Appendix J: Selection rule for j
This sum must be proportional to δim because if i̸ = m, it is impossible for both
(ijk) and (mjk) to be permutations of (xyz) as they must be to get a non-vanishing
contribution to the sum.
We can determine the constant of proportionality by
making a concrete choice for i = m. For example, when they are both x we have
X
jk
ǫxjkǫxjk = ǫxyzǫxyz + ǫxzyǫxzy = 2.
(I.10)
When these results are used in equation (I.8), we have ﬁnally
Mss′ = 2µ0
3 |ψ(0)|2⟨s|
X
i
µNi · µei|s′⟩.
(I.11)
Appendix J: Selection rule for j
In Problem 7.21 the selection rule on l is derived by calculating [L2, [L2, xi]] and
then squeezing the resulting equation between states ⟨l, ml| and |l′, m′
l⟩. The alge-
bra uses only two facts about the operators L and x, namely [Li, xj] = i P
k ǫijkxk,
and L · x = 0. Now if we substitute J for L, the ﬁrst equation carries over (i.e.,
[Ji, xj] = i P
k ǫijkxk) but the second does not (J·x = S·x). To proceed, we deﬁne
the operator
X ≡J × x −ix.
(J.1)
Since X is a vector operator, it will satisfy the commutation relations [Ji, Xj] =
i P
k ǫijkXk, as can be veriﬁed by explicit calculation. Moreover X is perpendicular
to J:
J · X =
X
klm
ǫklmJkJlxm −i
X
m
Jmxm
= 1
2
X
klm
ǫklm[Jk, Jl]xm −i
X
m
Jmxm
= 1
2
X
klm
ǫklmi
X
p
ǫklpJpxm −i
X
m
Jmxm = 0,
(J.2)
where the last equality uses equation (I.10). We can now argue that the algebra
of Problem 7.21 will carry over with J substituted for L and X substituted for x.
Hence the matrix elements ⟨jm|Xk|j′m′⟩satisfy the selection rule |j −j′| = 1.
Now we squeeze a component of equation (J.1) between two states of well-
deﬁned angular momentum
⟨jm|Xr|j′m′⟩=
X
st
ǫrst
X
j′′m′′
⟨jm|Js|j′′m′′⟩⟨j′′m′′|xt|j′m′⟩−i⟨jm|xr|j′m′⟩
=
X
m′′st
ǫrst⟨jm|Js|jm′′⟩⟨jm′′|xt|j′m′⟩−i⟨jm|xr|j′m′⟩,
(J.3)
where the sum over j′′ has been reduced to the single term j′′ = j because [J2, Js] =
0. The left side vanishes for |j−j′|̸ = 1. Moreover, since J·x is a scalar, it commutes
with J2 and we have that ⟨jm|J · x|j′m′⟩= 0 unless j = j′, or
X
m′′t
⟨jm|Jt|jm′′⟩⟨jm′′|xt|j′m′⟩∝δjj′
(J.4)
Let |j −j′| > 1, then in matrix notation we can write equations (J.3) for r = x, y
and (J.4) as
0 = Jyz −Jzy −ix
0 = Jzx −Jxz −iy
0 = Jxx + Jyy + Jzz,
(J.5)
where Jx etc are the (2j+1)×(2j+1) spin-j matrices introduced in §7.4.4 and x etc
are the (2j+1)×(2j′+1) arrays of matrix elements that we seek to constrain. These
are three linear homogeneous simultaneous equations for the three unknowns x, etc.
Unless the 3 × 3 matrix that has the J matrices for its elements is singular, the
equations will only have the trivial solution x = y = z = 0. One can demonstrate
that the matrix is non-singular by eliminating ﬁrst x and then y. Multiplying the
ﬁrst equation by iJx and then subtracting the third, and taking the second from
iJz times the ﬁrst, we obtain
0 = (iJxJy −Jz)z −(iJxJz + Jy)y
0 = (iJzJy + Jx)z −(iJ2
z −i)y.
(J.6)


Restrictions on scattering potentials
301
Eliminating y yields
0 = {i(J2
z −1)(iJxJy −Jz) −(iJxJz + Jy)(iJzJy + Jx)}z
= {−J2
zJxJy −iJ3
z + JxJy + iJz
+ JxJ2
zJy −i(JxJzJx + JyJzJy) −JyJx}z.
(J.7)
We can simplify the matrix that multiplies z by working Jz to the front. In fact,
using
JxJ2
zJy = (JzJx −iJy)JzJy = Jz(JzJx −iJy)Jy −i(JzJy + iJx)Jy
= J2
zJxJy −2iJzJ2
y + JxJy
(J.8)
and
JxJzJx = JzJ2
x −iJyJx
JyJzJy = JzJ2
y + iJxJy
)
⇒JxJzJx + JyJzJy = Jz(J2
x + J2
y) −Jz
(J.9)
equation (J.7) simpliﬁes to
{iJz(3 −J2 −2J2
y) + JxJy}z = 0.
(J.10)
The matrix multiplying z is not singular, so z = 0. Given this result, the second
of equations (J.9) clearly implies that y = 0, which in turn implies that x = 0.
This completes the demonstration that the matrix elements of the dipole operator
between states of well deﬁned angular momentum vanish unless |j −j′| ≤1.
Appendix K: Restrictions on scattering potentials
The Ω± operators of equation (12.3) require us to evaluate eiHt/¯he−iH0t/¯h as t →
∓∞. Since e±i∞is not mathematically well deﬁned, we must check we really know
what Ω± actually means.
We can determine Ω± from equation (12.13) if it is possible to take the limit
t →∓∞in the upper limit of integration. Hence the Ω± operators will make sense
so long as this integral converges when acting on free states.
Let’s concentrate for a while on Ω−, with |ψ; 0⟩= Ω−|φ; 0⟩telling us that |ψ⟩
and |φ⟩behave the same way in the distant future. Using equation (12.13), we
have
|ψ; 0⟩= Ω(t′)|φ; 0⟩+ i
¯h
Z ∞
t′ dτ U †(τ)V U0(τ)|φ; 0⟩.
(K.1)
To decide if the integral converges, we ask whether its modulus is ﬁnite (as it must
be if |ψ⟩can be normalized). The triangle inequality |v1 + v2| ≤|v1| + |v2| tells
us that the modulus of an integral is no greater than the integral of the modulus
of its integrand, so

Z ∞
t′ dτ U †(τ)V U0(τ)|φ; 0⟩
 ≤
Z ∞
t′ dτ
U †(τ)V U0(τ)|φ; 0⟩
 .
(K.2)
Since U(τ) is unitary, the integrand simpliﬁes to |V U0(τ)|φ; 0⟩| = |V |φ; τ⟩| where
|φ; τ⟩is the state of the free particle at time τ. If the potential depends only on
position, it can be written V =
R
d3x V (x)|x⟩⟨x|, and the integrand on the right of
equation (K.2) becomes
V |φ; τ⟩
 = ⟨φ; τ|V 2|φ; τ⟩1/2 =
Z
d3x V 2(x)|⟨x|φ; τ⟩|2
1/2
.
(K.3)
What does this expression mean? At any ﬁxed time, |⟨x|φ; τ⟩|2 d3x is the probabil-
ity that we ﬁnd our particle in a small volume d3x. Equation (K.3) instructs us to
add up these probabilities over all space, weighted by the square of the potential –
in other words (with the square root) we calculate the rms V (x) felt by the particle
at time τ. As time progresses, the particle moves and we repeat the process, adding
up the rms potential all along the line of ﬂight.
Now 1 = ⟨φ; τ|φ; τ⟩=
R
d3x |⟨x|φ; τ⟩|2, we can be conﬁdent that for any
given value of τ the integral over x on the right of (K.3) will be ﬁnite. Since the
integrand of the integral over τ is manifestly positive, convergence of the integral
over τ requires that
lim
τ→∞
Z
d3x V 2(x) |⟨x|φ; τ⟩|2
1/2
< O(τ −1).
(K.3b)


302
Appendix K: Restrictions on scattering potentials
We began our discussion of scattering processes by claiming that the real particle
should be free when far from the target, so it’s not surprising that we now ﬁnd a
condition which requires that the particle feels no potential at late times.
If we neglect dispersion, |⟨x|φ; τ⟩|2 is just a function of the ratio ξ ≡x/τ
as the particle’s wavepacket moves around. Assuming that the potential varies as
some power r−n at large radii, we have for large τ
Z
d3x V 2(x) |⟨x|φ; τ⟩|2 ≃τ 3−2n
Z
d3ξ V 2(ξ)f(ξ).
(K.4)
Hence, at late times the rms potential varies as ∼τ −n+3/2 and Ω± is certainly well
deﬁned for potentials that drop faster than r−5/2. When dispersion is taken into
account, we can sometimes strengthen this result to include potentials that drop
more slowly – see Problem 12.4.
Unfortunately, the Coulomb potential does not satisfy our condition. We will
not let this bother us too greatly because pure Coulomb potentials never arise – if
we move far enough away, they are always shielded by other charges.
